Chapter 1: Jinnah and Jawaharlal

EARLY SEPTEMBER 1946, Wavell invited the nationalist po- | etess Sarojini Naidu to Viceroy’s House for dinner. Naidu was a big, bawdy, irreverent woman—a scintillating raconteur and dinner party companion, especially compared to the often dour Indian politi- cians. Not even Gandhi escaped her lacerating wit: she impishly called the Mahatma “Mickey Mouse” for the way his ears stuck out from his bald head.’ Naidu had been friends with most of the leading Indian politicians, including Gandhi and Nehru, for decades. She had known Jinnah al- most since his first days as a twentysomething lawyer in Bombay, when he had struggled to find clients and supposedly had had to hustle games of billiards on the side to pay the rent.” Naidu was the one who had joked that she needed “a fur coat” to be friends with the Muslim leader. Reluctantly, Wavell had sworn in Nehru’s interim administration on 2 September without the League’s participation. Naidu did not envy the viceroy the task of bringing Jinnah and Nehru to a meeting of minds. As she explained over dinner, Jinnah’s wariness of the Congress leaders went back thirty years. It was an operatic history. “Mrs. N. spoke of Jin- nah rather as of Lucifer,” Wavell recorded in his journal that night, “a fallen angel, one who had once promised to be a great leader of Indian freedom, but who had cast himself out of the Congress heaven.” Indeed, at the beginning of his political career, Jinnah, not Jawaharlal,


JINNAH AND JAWAHARLAL « 23 had looked like India’s man of destiny. Unlike Nehru, the Muslim leader had come from humble beginnings. His father ran a struggling trading business in Karachi. When Jinnah studied at the Inns of Court in Lon- don in the late 1890s, he survived for three years on what the charmed young Nehru later spent in one.* His difficult early years as a lawyer in Bombay instilled in Jinnah a lifelong penuriousness. Years later, after his bank accounts had fattened with rupees, friends would ask him why he still totted up the servants’ salaries and expenditures every day. “This is hard-earned money!” he'd exclaim. “This is hard-earned money!”® Jinnah had a cold, relentless courtroom style that earned him enemies but also victories; by 1916 he had become a force at the Bombay Bar. At the beginning of the twentieth century, politics on the subcontinent was a matter for gentlemen — successful lawyers, doctors, and wealthy industrialists — who gathered under the auspices of the Indian National Congress, established in 1885, to debate how to move the country grad- ually toward self-government within the British Empire. Jinnah fit right in with this crowd. If anything, his Savile Row suits were better tailored, his pants more sharply creased, his two-toned shoes even shinier than those of more established figures. Within the Congress, he quickly be- came known as a man to watch. Jinnah’s relative youth set him apart—he had not yet turned forty —as did his rapier intellect. But his religion is what made him truly unusual among the well-heeled Congress grandees. Ten years ear- lier, he had been one of only 44 Muslims among 1,500 delegates at the party's annual session. At the time, most prominent Muslims had no interest in kicking out the British. By sheer force of numbers, Hindus would dominate any democratic India. Only under British rule, these Muslim leaders believed, would their interests be safeguarded.° With British encouragement, a group of noblemen and large landowners had formed the Muslim League in 1906 specifically to act as a counterbal- ance to the Congress. Like other Congressmen, Jinnah believed the British were deliber- ately stoking Muslim anxieties in order to justify the continuation of the Raj. “I say to my Musalman friends: Fear not!” Jinnah thundered in one speech. He called the specter of Hindu domination “a bogey, which is put before you by your enemies to frighten you, to scare you away


from cooperation and unity, which are essential for the establishment of self-government.” In 1916, while still a member of the Congress, Jinnah accepted an invitation to lead the Muslim League. He hoped to broker an alliance between the two parties that the British would be unable to ignore. Jinnah knew the frictions between the subcontinent’s two great com- munities had deep roots, of course. Several of the Muslim conquerors who had dominated India before the British had brutalized their de- feated Hindu foes, massacring thousands and demolishing their flower- strewn temples. That history often got mixed up with contemporary economic tensions— where Hindu peasants continued to struggle under oppressive Muslim landlords, for instance. But the animosities cut both ways. Muslims bristled at the fact that their Hindu neighbors refused to share food with them or water from the same vessels, for fear of ritual pollution. The Hindu moneylenders who proliferated across India held all too many poorer Muslims in financial bondage. In many parts of India, Muslim and Hindu families lived together amicably, even attending each other’s weddings and festivals. Even then, however, bloody riots periodically broke out when religious sen- sibilities were offended. Muslims attacked Hindu devotees when they marched past mosques during Muslim prayer-time noisily ringing bells and chanting. Hindus assaulted Muslims when they slaughtered the cows held sacred in Hinduism. Muslims caricatured Hindus as banias, or merchants — haggling tricksters who were not to be trusted. Hindus stereotyped Muslims as violent and brutal. In the summer of 1916, Jinnah himself ran up against one of the most stubborn communal prejudices. His good friend Sir Dinshaw Petit had invited him to escape Bombay’s suffocating heat and spend several weeks in cool Darjeeling, high in the eastern Himalayas. Petit was a Parsi, one of India’s small but hyper-successful community of Zoroas- trians, and heir to a textile fortune. More importantly, he had a sixteen- year-old daughter —a sinuous beauty named Rattanbai, or “Ruttie.” Jinnah would have been hard-pressed to ignore her presence. She wore gossamer-thin saris that clung to her body and had a ready, flirtatious laugh. One prim memsahib described her as “a complete minx.”® Like many Indians, Jinnah had been married young to someone of his


JINNAH AND JAWAHARLAL « 25 parents choosing, a fourteen-year-old Gujarati village girl named Emi- bai. A year later she had died while he was away studying in London. He told friends that he hadn't kissed a woman since then ( although, hearing that particular tale, the irrepressible Sarojini Naidu trilled, “Liar, liar, liar!”),’ Jinnah left no record of what transpired between him and Rut- tie amid the emerald tea plantations of Darjeeling, but clearly a romance blossomed. In July Ruttie penned a breathless letter to her friend Pad- maja, Naidu's sixteen-year-old daughter. “I am no Philistine who would think the outpour of fine emotions akin to madness,” she wrote. “If it really is madness, why can’t all of us be mad!”"° She was in love. When they returned to Bombay at the end of the summer, Jinnah asked Petit how he felt about intermarriage. The Parsi didn’t realize what his Muslim friend was angling at. A capital idea, Petit declared — just the thing to help break down the foolish barriers that divided Indians from one another. Jinnah’s next question horrified him, though. The nearly forty-year-old Muslim marrying his teenage daughter? The idea was “absurd.”"’ Petit not only refused but took out a restraining order against Jinnah to prevent the couple from seeing one another.” Jinnah was not to be discouraged, however, either personally or polit- ically. He and Ruttie continued to correspond secretly. Like many of the youths in her circle, she was enthralled by the romance of the nationalist movement, and that winter she eagerly followed the news coming out of the graceful Mughal city of Lucknow, capital of the United Provinces, where Jinnah had helped arrange for the League and the Congress to hold their annual sessions simultaneously. For the first time the two par- ties agreed on a common set of demands to make of the British — what became known as the Lucknow Pact. Jinnah won for Muslims a guar- anteed percentage of seats in any future legislature, among other safe- guards that would ensure they would not be perpetually outvoted by the Hindu majority.’* By coincidence, the lead negotiator for the Con- gress was another successful lawyer, a Kashmiri Hindu who had been involved in nationalist politics for years — Nehru’s father, Motilal. The Lucknow Pact raised Jinnah’s political stock sky-high. The next year, Sarojini Naidu published a glowing, almost treacly tribute to him entitled “Ambassador of Unity”; he seemed a shoo-in to become presi- dent of the Congress one day. In November 1917, Secretary of State for


India Sir Edwin Montagu met with Jinnah on a visit to Bombay. “I is, of course, an outrage that such a man should have no chance of running the affairs of his own country,’ the impressed Briton noted in his di- ary that night.’” A few months later, soon after Ruttie had turned eigh- teen, she and Jinnah scandalized Bombay’s Parsi community by eloping. They quickly became one of the city’s most glamorous couples, cruising down Marine Drive in Jinnah’s convertible at sunset each night, her hair loose in the wind. Then Jinnah threw it all away. Just as his political career was reaching its zenith, the spotlight in India shifted to another Gujarati lawyer, born just 30 miles from Jinnah’s ancestral village. In 1915, forty-five-year-old Mohandas Gandhi had returned to India from South Africa, where he had lived for the past two decades. Having given up his English suits for a simple white dhoti, and his barrister’s wig for an enormous turban, he looked more like a farmer than a revolutionary. He was wiry like Jinnah and much smaller in stature. Too nervous to stammer out arguments in court, he hadn’t been much of a lawyer. Yet some inner vitality coursed through him, illuminating his mischievous eyes and expanding a taut chest. He had the intensity of a sage. In South Africa, Gandhi had established a pair of ashrams in which to conduct what he called his “experiments with truth’— everything from fad diets and “nature cures” to attempts to break down Hinduism’s caste barriers. He and his acolytes lived lives of utopian simplicity: they swore off drink and sex, prayed regularly, grew and cooked their own vegetarian food, cleaned their own toilets. Outside the ashram, Gan- dhi’s efforts to organize South Africa’s Indian immigrant community made him a celebrity. Instead of meekly submitting to laws that were unjust, or challenging the more powerful government by force of arms, he taught local Indians to resist peacefully — to court jail willingly for the sake of their principles. Gandhi dubbed his strategy satyagraha — literally, “soul force” — and it proved devastatingly effective. South African officials had no idea how to handle the “wild and disconcerting commotion” caused by thousands of Indians marching in protest and offering themselves up for arrest. The prisons swelled with Indian inmates, and journalists from around the world flocked to interview the charismatic Gandhi. It was all “very


JINNAH AND JAWAHARLAL « 27 trying,’ admitted future South African premier Gen. Jan Christiaan Smuts." When Gandhi now proposed replicating his methods in India, Jin- nah balked. The Muslim did not challenge the principle behind satya- graha — the idea that Indians should peacefully refuse to cooperate with their British masters. “I say I am fully convinced of non-cooperation? he declared at a contentious Congress meeting in September 1920. But Jin- nah did not believe that the Indian masses were educated or disciplined enough to ensure their protests remained nonviolent. He thought the Congress leaders needed to prepare their followers first. “Will you not give me time for this?” he asked the crowd at the meeting, plaintively.’” Not all of Jinnah’s motivations were so high-minded, of course. He was unquestionably a snob: later, when tens of thousands of Muslims turned out at rallies to see him, he would recoil from shaking hands with his own supporters.'* He also found Gandhi's appeal to the largely Hindu masses dangerously sectarian. At his evening prayer meetings, the Mahatma would frame his political arguments using parables from Hindu fables; he described his vision for an independent India as a “Ram Rajya’—a mythical state of ideal government under the god Ram. All the chanting and praying that accompanied Gandhi's sermons seemed to Jinnah like theatrics.” What historians rarely acknowledge, though, is that Jinnah worried less about Hindus than about the danger of inflaming religious passions among Muslims. At the time, mullahs across the subcontinent were threatening to launch a jihad if the British, who had defeated the Ot- tomans in World War I, deposed the Turkish Sultan — the caliph, or leader, of the world’s Sunni Muslims. Led by a pair of fiery brothers, Mohammad and Shaukat Ali, this “Khilafat” movement had attracted an unsavory mob of supporters. The acerbic Bengali writer Nirad C. Chaudhuri remembers Khilafat volunteers as “recruited from the low- est Muslim riffraff... brandishing their whips at people.” Jinnah had no sympathy for these rough-edged Muslims nor for their fanatic cause. He feared that their rage would inevitably turn from the British to Hindus. Gandhi, on the other hand, threw his support be- hind the Khilafat movement; in turn, Muslim votes gave him the slight majority he needed to launch his satyagraha movement.” Years later,


Gandhi recalled Jinnah telling him that he had “ruined politics in India by dragging up a lot of unwholesome elements in Indian life and giving them political prominence, that it was a crime to mix up politics and religion the way he had done.” Nowadays most Indian accounts put Jinnah’s opposition to Gandhi down to jealousy. At a follow-up Congress meeting in December 1920, Jinnah drew jeers by referring to “Mister” Gandhi in his speech, rather than the more respectful “Mahatma.” In fact, although he slipped once or twice more, Jinnah did switch to using “Mahatma.” What he abso- lutely refused to do was refer to Khilafat leader Mohammad Alias “Mau- lana,’ a term reserved for distinguished Islamic scholars. Jinnah was not about to encourage what he saw as religious demagoguery. “If you will not allow me the liberty to ... speak of a man in the language which I think is right, I say you are denying me the liberty which you are asking for,’ he vainly protested.” The crowd’s howls chased him off the stage. That humiliating scene marked the beginning of a long slide into ir- relevance for Jinnah as a national political figure. Sadly, his concerns appeared to be borne out less than a year later, when Khilafat protesters in the southern Malabar region turned on their Hindu neighbors and massacred hundreds of them. Yet by that time, Gandhi, now the undis- puted leader of the Congress, had irreversibly transformed the national- ist movement. A new crowd now dominated party meetings — middle- class and lower-middle-class men and women, clad in saris and kurtas and sitting on the ground cross-legged rather than in chairs. Jinnah still got upset when his bearer laid out the wrong cufflinks for him.” He no longer fit in. Jinnah did not disappear from the political scene, but as Gandhi’s Congress grew larger and larger, the League leader was pushed further and further to the margins. He became what he had never wanted to be—a purely Muslim politician, reduced to petitioning for conces- sions for his community. By the end of the 1920s, the League had begun to break up into factions, and Jinnah’s influence had become negligi- ble.”? Now his former Congress comrades dismissed him as not even the most important among several Muslim leaders. They suspected that Jinnah could not “deliver the goods’— the widespread support of In- dian Muslims.”®


JINNAH AND JAWAHARLAL « 29 This was not the illustrious nationalist hero with whom the impres- sionable Ruttie had fallen in love. After giving birth toa daughter, Dina, in August 1919, Jinnah’s young wife had plunged into a half-baked mys- ticism, taking up crystals and séances. She may have begun using drugs like opium to combat a painful intestinal ailment.”’ The differences in the couple's ages and temperaments became too obvious to ignore. “She drove me mad,” Jinnah told one friend. “She was a child and I should never have married her.”** In early 1928, Ruttie moved into a suite at Bombay's Taj Mahal Hotel, leaving Jinnah home with eight-year-old Dina.” That spring, visiting Paris with her mother, Ruttie fell into an unexplained coma and almost died. Jinnah, traveling in Ireland with a friend, immediately rushed to the French capital and arranged for a new doctor for her. While she recov- ered, their relationship did not. Jinnah returned to India at the end of the year alone, now abandoned not just by his followers but by his wife. Two months later, on 19 February 1929, Ruttie fell unconscious in her room at the Taj Mahal Hotel. She died the next day, on her twenty- ninth birthday. Most accounts say only that the circumstances of Ruttie’s demise were “mysterious.” But her daughter, Dina, put it more bluntly: “My mother committed suicide,’ she told Jinnah’s first biographer.” The em- barrassed author left that nugget out of his hagiography, and it’s never been acknowledged elsewhere. Still, even at the time, rumors about the death were rife. One of Nehru’s sisters wrote that she had “reason to believe that [Ruttie had] planned” her own demise.”" On the night of Ruttie’s funeral, Jinnah sat with a mutual friend, Kanji Dwarkadas, who had seen her just before she died. “Never have I found a man so sad and bitter. He screamed his heart out,” Dwarkadas recalled. “Something I saw had snapped in him. The death of his wife was not just a sad event, nor just something to be grieved over, but he took it, this act of God, as a failure and a personal defeat in his life.” Jinnah never wanted to be reminded of his private tragedy, which had become so humiliatingly public. He packed away Ruttie’s jades and silks and volumes of Oscar Wilde in boxes and rarely mentioned her again.” There was nothing left for Jinnah in India. In its two decades of ex- istence, the Muslim League had accumulated fewer than two thousand


members, most of whom did not pay their dues.’ Creditors tried to seize what little furniture remained at League headquarters to sell at auction. Parts of the factionalized party did not even recognize Jinnah’s leadership. In 1931, Jinnah moved to London with Dina and his spinster sister, Fatima. He took up cases before the Privy Council and bought a ram- bling Victorian mansion overlooking Hampstead Heath. He refused to answer questions about when — or if — he would return to India. “T seem, he told an Indian journalist over lunch at Simpson’s, with star- tling candor, “to have reached a dead end.”™* The crowds were beyond belief. When Jawaharlal looked out from the rickety stages he climbed day after day, he saw a seething, sweaty, excited mass of humanity. Tens, sometimes hundreds of thousands of people stretched to the horizon. As he crisscrossed India — by train, car, bul- lock cart, horse, camel, elephant, bicycle, paddleboat, canoe — thou- sands more Indians lined the roadsides, their hands clasped in respect- ful greeting, hoping for a glimpse of the forty-seven-year-old Congress president.” Nehru shouted himself hoarse over static-filled loudspeakers. At times the crowds’ “madness entered my veins,” he wrote to a friend, and he would leap into the heaving mass to get closer to his admirers.”° Over the course of three months of electioneering at the end of 1936 and beginning of 1937, Nehru estimated that more than 10 million Indians turned out to see him at rallies and along the roadsides. He shook so many hands that his palms swelled. Much was at stake in the February 1937 elections. For the first time, Indians would take control of the legislatures and ministries that gov- erned the eleven provinces of British India. But that hardly explained the outpouring of affection that greeted Nehru wherever he went; most people in the crowds did not meet the qualifications to vote. “Why does this happen? I can’t make out and all my vanity does not help me to un- derstand,” he wrote, genuinely amazed.” Jawaharlal’s rise had been as vertiginous as Jinnah’s fall. Twenty years before, when the League leader was negotiating his triumphant Luck- now Pact with Nehru’s father, the son had been little more, in his own


JINNAH AND JAWAHARLAL - 31 words, than a conceited “prig.”** He had returned from England in 1912, overeducated and aimless, disdainful of the “immoderately moderate” nationalist politics of the time yet with no alternative to propose.” He worked dully in his father’s law offices and took the cases sent his way. Motilal found him a shy, pretty Kashmiri girl named Kamala to marry. They wed when she turned sixteen (he was twenty-five) and moved into a wing of Nehru’s childhood home. A year later they, too, had a daugh- ter: Indira. When he met Gandhi on the sidelines of the 1916 Lucknow confer- ence, Nehru found the ascetic older man to be “very distant and differ- ent and unpolitical.” Much of the Mahatma’s philosophizing looked to the resolutely secular Cambridge man —as it had to Jinnah — like cant. Yet as a child, Nehru had fallen in love with Lafcadio Hearn’s tales of adventure and imagined himself, sword in hand, leading his country- men to freedom against the British.” Gandhi’s satyagraha offered him exactly what he had been craving — action. It was a way to fight the Brit- ish, albeit without weapons or bloodshed. Nehru had thrown himself into the cause. For Gandhi the indepen- dence struggle was at least as much moral as political: he wanted Indians to make themselves worthy of freedom, to develop self-reliance before assuming self-government. Nehru became a true believer. He gave up his lawyer’s suits for kurtas made of homespun cotton. He replaced the rich roasts and claret at Anand Bhavan with plain flatbread and lentils. He even got himself a charkha, a wooden spinning wheel, and heeded Gandhi's call for every Indian to spin yarn at least an hour each day to break the dependence on British-made cloth. A shy speaker at first, Nehru found his voice organizing peasants in the countryside around Allahabad, tromping from village to muddy vil- lage trailed by policemen, agents from the Criminal Investigation De- partment, and, on one occasion, a most unhappy deputy collector from Lucknow wearing patent leather pumps. The young rebel was arrested for organizing picketing, for seditious statements, and for defying ofh- cial orders. He went to jail frequently and willingly: at times he seemed to enjoy himself in confinement more than outside prison walls. “Jail has indeed become a heaven for us,” he declared at one early trial, in a statement that became a call to arms for many young activists. “To serve


India in the battle of freedom is honour enough. ... But to suffer for the dear country! What greater good fortune could befall an Indian?”** In his jail diaries, he would record how many feet of yarn he had spun each day; in 1922, he sent home 10,576 yards of fine homespun cloth.” “[We] lived in a kind of intoxication,’ Nehru later wrote.** He was convinced he and his comrades were not only breaking India’s shackles but chang- ing the world. As Jinnah’s profile shrank during the 1920s, Nehru’s grew, both inside and outside of India. Kamala was a sickly bride, suffering from tubercu- losis, and he spent months with her in Europe going from sanatorium to sanatorium. On those trips he developed ties to leftists and revolution- aries from other parts of the world, and integrated India’s struggle into the broader wave of nationalist movements then sweeping parts of Asia and the Middle East. His international profile added to his glamour at home. By the end of the decade, Nehru had already served as Congress president once, at age forty. Newspapers showered him with flowery honorifics. When he came down to breakfast, Kamala and his youngest sister, Krishna (nicknamed “Betty” as a child by her English governess), would bow deeply and ask “how the Jewel of India had slept, or if the Embodiment of Sacrifice would like some bacon and eggs.”"* Nehru’s wife, like Jinnah’s, died young. In February 1936, after months of fruitless treatment, Kamala passed away in a Lausanne sanatorium from tuberculosis. Theirs had been an affectionate and respectful mar- riage but not a passionate one. Nehru’s letters home from jail were duti- ful and banal — laundry lists of queries about relatives, requests for new books, admonitions for Kamala to take care of her health. Her death seemed to elevate their relationship, at least in the eyes of others. Nehru returned from Europe to an outpouring of sympathy. Thousands of condolence letters flooded in; newspapers ran paeans to Kamala asa vir- tuous, selfless helpmeet to the nationalist cause. Bazaar vendors sold a diptych with photos of her and Jawaharlal side by side, captioned “The Ideal Couple.” Before the end of the year, Nehru appears to have plunged into a far steamier affair with none other than Ruttie’s young friend Padmaja Naidu, Sarojini’s buxom daughter. They had known each other for years. His letters to “Bebee,” a decade his junior, had always been far


JINNAH AND JAWAHARLAL « 33 more flirtatious than those to Kamala. Now Nehru openly admitted to the sultry Padmaja, “I am afraid I do not feel paternally inclined towards you.”° From the campaign trail he sent her pining letters: “My dear, how you fill my mind! When I ought to be thinking of something else your image creeps in unawares through some window and upsets the train of my thought.’*’ On a visit to Agra her image “got rather mixed up with the moonlight and the Taj,” he sighed.** He signed one missive, “My love to you, carissima.”” Flush with passion, adored by millions, Nehru could barely deign to notice Jinnah, who had returned to India to lead the League’s cam- paign in the crucial 1937 elections. Since 1909 the British had allowed Muslims to vote only for candidates for certain reserved Muslim seats. Jinnah publicly suggested that after the elections, he would be open to throwing the League’s Muslim support behind his old comrades in the Congress. Nehru mocked the idea. “I thank Mr. Jinnah for the offer,’ he told reporters in November 1936, but “so far as our fight for freedom is concerned, it is going to be carried on by the Indian National Congress and the Indian National Congress alone.’”” Indians of all faiths faced a simple choice in the elections, Nehru declared: either cast their votes for the Congress Party or resign themselves to continued servitude to the British.”* Jinnah tried to protest. There was a third player in India, he in- sisted — the League. But the results supported Nehru. Congress swept the elections, taking control of eight of eleven provinces. The League polled less than 5 percent of the Muslim vote nationwide. Two or three winning League candidates did flirt with the idea of supporting Con- gress administrations in exchange for provincial cabinet posts. But Nehru laid down stiff terms: if any Leaguers wanted a share of power, he said, they would have to join the Congress and obey its high command rather than Jinnah.” Ironically, Congress had done even worse than the League among Muslim voters, most of whom had cast their ballots for smaller, regional parties.** Yet that did not faze Nehru. He directed party leaders to de- ploy Congress's vast resources in an attempt to win over the Muslim masses. To Jinnah, his younger rival seemed intent on becoming India’s “ambassador of unity” himself.


Jinnah was now sixty years old, graying and sickly. Unlike Nehru — whose affair with Padmaja would hardly have been a secret in certain circles — he was a lonely man. His pinched sister Fatima was his only real companion. In November 1938, his nineteen-year-old daughter Dina defied him and married a Parsi boy against his wishes.”* From this moment onward a new bitterness entered the League leader’s voice _ whenever Nehru’s name came up. “What can I say to the busybody President of the Congress... [who] must poke his nose into everything except minding his own business?” Jinnah seethed to one journalist.” Nehru had become more than a political opponent: he had usurped all the power, glory, and romance that had once seemed Jinnah’s by right. Jinnah could easily give up and return to London. Or he could fight back. His genius was to link his own frustrations to those of his commu- nity. After the elections, Muslims, too, shared Jinnah’s sense of dismay and powerlessness. In the Congress provinces, a whole new breed of of- ficial began stalking the halls of government — men in rough, rumpled homespun dhotis and white caps styled like the one Gandhi wore. The vast majority of the newcomers were Hindu, and they now controlled the schools and police. British officials, once omnipotent, had to take orders from them. Ministers often favored other Hindus for jobs, li- censes, and patronage. Educated, urban Muslims — the professionals and petty clerks who would become the backbone of a rejuvenated Muslim League — could see that their prospects looked bleak in any Congress-ruled India. Jinnah played on those fears deftly. Muslims complained of petty in- dignities, many of them relating to their children’s education. In places pupils were required to salute Mahatma Gandhi’s picture each morn- ing or to sing the Congress anthem, “Bande Mataram,” which included several verses thought by some to be anti-Muslim. Teachers in govern- ment schools allegedly favored Hindi over Urdu.” Jinnah began loudly decrying these “atrocities.” He launched a newspaper, Dawn, whose editorials dispensed with any pretense to objectivity or moderation. The paper ran a thirty-two-part series on the supposed “holocaust” be- ing perpetrated by Congress entitled “It Shall Never Happen Again.” Across India, “tragedy followed tragedy and blood flowed instead of the milk of human kindness,’ the paper fulminated. “Terror stalked the


JINNAH AND JAWAHARLAL 35 countryside and rendered the helpless, outnumbered few despairing and desperate.”*” Where Jinnah had once criticized Gandhi for exploiting religion, he now started holding forth on the “magic power” of the Muslim com- munity.”* In by-elections, League flyers assured Muslim voters that God and the Prophet favored the party’s candidates. “Jinnah seems to have gone to pieces,’ Nehru wrote in exasperation to Padmaja.” In public, the League president exchanged his suits for the knee-length sherwani and leggings of a Mughal nobleman. He persuaded the local Muslim powerbrokers who had dominated elections in the provinces of Bengal and the Punjab to throw their weight behind him nationally. Within a year of losing 95 percent of the Muslim vote, Jinnah began describing the Muslim League as the “sole representative” of India’s Muslims. Nehru refused to take any of this seriously. “Am I to insult my intel- ligence by talking baby-talk of an age gone by?” he wrote to a Muslim colleague who had switched allegiance from Congress to the League.” Nehru remained convinced that the supposed “Hindu-Muslim divide” was nothing but a nuisance, that both communities would soon real- ize they were being exploited equally by the British and Indian upper classes. After an abortive public exchange of letters with Jinnah — which the League leader concluded by sighing, “It is really difficult for me to make you understand the position any further’— Nehru gave up.” Jawaharlal had become Jinnah’s most useful foil, and he would play a critical role in the demand for Pakistan. The global cataclysm that would make so many things possible, even as it destroyed so much, had begun. War between Japan and China broke out in the summer of 1937. Ger- many seized Austria on 12 March 1938. By mid-1939, Europe, Asia, and Africa were aflame. For years now Nehru, like his leftist friends in Eu- rope, had been warning of the looming Fascist threat. Yet when the vice- roy — Wavell’s predecessor, the ponderous and inflexible Victor Hope, 2nd Marquess of Linlithgow — declared on 3 September 1939 that India had joined the fight against Hitler, the only Indian he involved in the de- cision was the “very slow, old moulvi; or Muslim scholar, who translated the announcement into Urdu just minutes before it was broadcast on All-India Radio.” Only afterward did Linlithgow call in Indian political leaders to solicit their support for the war effort. Nehru was outraged.


Most of the Congress leaders, including Gandhi, thought it was un- seemly to haggle for concessions while the British were battling for their lives. But Nehru was the party’s foreign policy “expert, and his official response to Linlithgow’s plea ran to several thousand words. Its rhetoric was soaring. “The crisis that has overtaken Europe,’ Nehru wrote, “is not of Europe only but of humanity and will not pass like other crises and wars, leaving the essential structure of the present-day world in- tact.”*’ At the same time, Indians could hardly be expected to lay down their lives for an empire that promised to keep them in chains. Nehru first wanted a declaration that India would be freed after the war and al- lowed to write its own constitution. In the meantime, he wanted Indian politicians to be brought into a war council under the viceroy, so that Indians themselves would take part in leading the war effort. Gandhi hailed the manifesto’s author as an “artist.” To Jinnah, Nehru’s resolution looked more like blackmail. The Brit- ish had beaten back all of Gandhi’s great satyagraha campaigns over the past twenty years. But as one rattled viceroy famously said, it had been a close-run thing: “Gandhi's was the most colossal experiment in the world’s history, and it came within an inch of succeeding.”® Britain could not risk another nationwide rebellion now: “American opinion of our policy in India is already sufficiently critical? the War Cabinet in London warned. “What it would be if a non-cooperation movement led, as it did last time, to the arrest and detention without trial of as many as 25,000 persons ... is easy to imagine.”** Nehru was making a play for independence, Jinnah feared. The League leader knew that if the British granted his rival’s demands, Con- gress would inevitably dominate any interim government, as well as any constitution-writing body set up after the war. The League — and Jin- nah himself — would again be shut out of power. The idea of breaking off a separate Muslim homeland had been float- ing around League circles for some time. While in exile in England, Jinnah had met the thirty-five-year-old Cambridge student Chaudhry Rahmat Ali, who had invented an acronym for this erstwhile nation. The first letter, “P” stood for his own province of Punjab; “A” for the rough tribal areas bordering Afghanistan; “K” for the lush, mountain- ous kingdom of Kashmir; “S” for the arid coastal province of Sind; and


JINNAH AND JAWAHARLAL © 37 “TAN” for the great wasteland of Baluchistan: PAKSTAN. (The “I” was added later to make the name more mellifluous.) At the time Jinnah had been skeptical. “He seemed to regard Rah- mat Ali's concept ... as some sort of Walt Disney dreamland, if not a Wellsian nightmare,’ a friend said.*’ But now, as a classified British in- telligence report indicated, Jinnah was looking for a way “to show the League as the full-blooded ally of Great Britain against her two enemies, the Nazis and the Congress.” When he met the viceroy in mid-March 1940, Jinnah essentially offered Pakistan to the British as a permanent foothold in the subcontinent —“a Muslim area run by Muslims in col- laboration with Great Britain.”® Importantly, staunch Pakistan would encompass the vulnerable Northwest Frontier, where the Nazis and their then-allies the Russians were most likely to invade. Two weeks later at a meeting in Lahore, the League set the creation of Pakistan — defined as “geographically contiguous ... areas in which the Muslims are numerically in a majority as in the North Western and Eastern Zones of India’—as its official goal.” By adding vast, Muslim- majority Bengal, Pakistan would gain the wealth brought in by the great port and manufacturing hub of Calcutta, though this eastern wing would be cut off from the rest of the country by the crown of northern India. Privately Jinnah reassured skeptical colleagues that Partition was only a bargaining chip: the British could not hand over power to Nehru as long as Hindus and Muslims did not even agree on whether they were one nation or two.” More than a few Muslim figures nevertheless wondered whether the League leader was wise to set their community against other Indians. The Aga Khan, the fabulously wealthy leader of the Ismaili sect and a one-time ally of Jinnah’s, worried about the bad blood that Muslim obstructionism was stirring up. “The bitter enmity now raised by the League and its leaders,” he warned in a letter to a friend, “will have to be paid for a hundred percent.””* The gracious Deccan Queen passenger train normally covered the 150 miles between Bombay and the hill town of Poona in three hours. Bom- bay’s industrialists and socialites made the trip often, winding through the thickly forested flanks of the Western Ghats to escape the soggy heat


along the coast. In racing season, their villas glittered with festival lights and resounded to the clink of champagne flutes. In early November 1942, Nehru’s sister Betty boarded the familiar train on a grimmer mission — to visit her husband, Raja, at Poonas Yeravada Prison. The trip took her ten hours. Heavily armed soldiers repeatedly halted the train at checkpoints, and in spots passengers had to wait while the tracks were cleared of debris. “All along the line we saw dead cattle, overturned railway carriages, and the wreckage of war,’ Betty later recalled.” This was not the work of the Nazis, sweeping down through the subcontinent like the Aryan invaders after whom they modeled them- selves. Nor had the Japanese wreaked upon India the same devastation Southeast Asia had suffered after Pearl Harbor. In British eyes, the field marshal responsible for this mayhem was none other than Betty’s older brother, Jawaharlal. The early years of the war had been especially trying for Nehru. Across the globe the Allies were battling desperately against Fascist hordes. Yet throughout it all he had sat on the sidelines, watching in disgust as co- lonial officials played tennis and put on black tie for dinner, while one by one their Asian territories fell to the enemy. Japan seized Hong Kong in December 1941. The Imperial Army would drive the British out of Malaya in January, and then conquer Singapore two weeks later. The Dutch East Indies fell in March, Burma in May. Nehru blamed Jinnah as much as the British for perpetuating this state of affairs. Shortly after the League passed its 1940 Pakistan resolu- tion, Winston Churchill had come to power in London. The blustery Tory diehard had begun his career in India as a Kiplingesque subaltern, subduing the Pathan tribes along the Northwest Frontier. His mental picture of the subcontinent had not changed much since then; as far as he was concerned, the empire had reigned over India for centuries, and it would do so for several more. The Atlantic Charter he signed with his American counterpart, Franklin Delano Roosevelt, which listed the restoration of “self-government” as one of the Allied war aims, did not, he imagined, apply to Britain’s colonies.” As Jinnah had intended, the Pakistan demand gave the prime min- ister an excuse to stall any further concessions to the Congress. In Au-


JINNAH AND JAWAHARLAL « 39 gust 1940, Churchill authorized the viceroy to declare that the British “could not contemplate” handing over power to any “government the authority of which was directly denied by large and powerful elements in India’s national life.””* Nehru raged that Jinnah had won a “veto” over political progress. By the middle of 1942, with the Japanese on India’s eastern borders, Nehru’ frustration was peaking. “I have the strongest feeling ... that the British mean to hang on here and we shall never get rid of them if we do not strike now,” he told the leftist American writer Edgar Snow in Wardha at the end of May.” Snow had traveled to the Mahatma’s ashram to interview Gandhi and Nehru, but also to deliver a message. The journalist had met with Roosevelt before leaving the States, and the president had told him to “ask Nehru to write me a letter and tell me exactly what he wants me to do for India.””° The United States had developed a keen interest in the subcontinent since entering the war against Japan. The American planes resupplying Chiang Kai-shek’s beleaguered forces in China flew out of air bases in eastern India. If the Japanese overran the country, the vital Middle East would be squeezed in an Axis pincer movement. At this critical moment, Roosevelt did not want Indians sitting out the war. The Mahatma, on the other hand, had decided that the time had come to launch another satyagraha, an “all-out” struggle that would not end until the British had “quit India,” bag and baggage.”” Nehru was torn, fearing that a widespread disobedience movement might open the door to Japanese invasion. He spent weeks in a state of “pitiable per- plexity,” according to the government’s Intelligence Bureau.”* But by the middle of June, two weeks after Snow’s visit, he was “reported to have given in to Gandhi, Linlithgow cabled to London.” According to one of his Congress colleagues, Nehru hoped that if nothing else, the Mahatma’ threat might encourage Roosevelt to intervene more force- fully.*° Ifanyone could force Churchill to bend, Nehru was betting, the powerful Americans could. It was a bad bet. “The political crisis in India had matured a year too early for the United States,” Undersecretary of State Sumner Welles later reflected.*’ Roosevelt had clashed with Churchill over India be- fore — once even prompting a drunken threat from the Briton to resign.


“Take India if that is what you want! Take it, by all means!” Churchill spluttered to an American diplomat in Washington, red-faced and nearly incoherent. “But I warn you that if I open the door a crack there will be the greatest bloodbath in all history.** Roosevelt, who had just begun negotiating the Normandy invasion with his British allies, could not risk an outright break with London now.” The British, not the Americans, delivered the reply to Gandhi's “Quit India” resolution, which the Congress approved on 9 August. That night police swept in after midnight and arrested the Mahatma and the rest of the Congress leadership. Unprepared, they had left their followers no instructions. Riots broke out spontaneously in several cit- ies. Within a week, the violence had spread and become more organ- ized — and bloodier. Across wide stretches of northern India, crudely armed peasants killed and drove out police and government officials from several districts. Saboteurs blocked or blew up rail lines to prevent the movement of troops and supplies. The army struggled for weeks, sometimes months, to regain control over the monsoon-soaked coun- tryside in the United Provinces, Bihar, and Bengal. Many Britons—even liberal ones—believed they were facing a well-planned, traitorous attempt by the Congress to overthrow the Raj. When authorities responded with brutal force — using tactics that one British governor later admitted “dragged out in the cold light of [day], nobody could defend”’— many simply looked away.” British troops opened fire on demonstrators repeatedly. In the Midnapore district of Bengal, police were accused of gang-raping seventy-three women to ter- rorize the rebels. Prisoners were forced to lie naked on blocks of ice until they passed out.”” The viceroy authorized the strafing of villagers from the air. Churchill saw no reason to treat the Congress as anything but war criminals, even though no plot to overthrow the Raj was ever discoy- ered. Nehru and the rest of the party’s high command — along with thousands of their followers — were locked up for the rest of the war. Nehru’s failed gamble left the political field wide open for Jinnah. Until this point, Linlithgow had held the League leader at a wary re- move, finding him useful in some cases, troublesome in others. Now, as one of the viceroy’s aides told Edgar Snow, Jinnah was “sitting on the


JINNAH AND JAWAHARLAL 41 finest velvet in the land.”** The British were convinced that they needed to maintain the goodwill of Indian Muslims, given their high represen- tation in the army, not to mention the importance of Britain’s Muslim allies in the Middle East. Linlithgow did not fret about the danger of inflating Jinnah’s stature: “He represents a minority, and a minority that can only effectively hold its own with our assistance,’ the viceroy breez- ily reminded London.*’ In province after province, British governors began ousting Con- gress-friendly ministries and replacing them with what they saw as more malleable Leaguers. By the middle of 1943, the party and its al- lies controlled all of the provinces that Jinnah had envisioned as part of “Pakistan,” from Sind in the west to Assam in the east. The extent of Jin- nah’s personal authority over these territories is questionable: regional Muslim leaders paid lip service to the League, as long as Jinnah did not meddle too much in their affairs.** But that didn’t stop him from boast- ing of his sway. Almost 99 percent of the subcontinent’s 100 million Muslims were behind him, Jinnah confidently declared at the League’s annual session in Delhi in April 1943, “leaving aside some who are trai- tors, cranks, supermen or lunatics.””” A few years earlier, a Muslim newspaper editor had given Jinnah a new honorific to compete with the Mahatma’: Quaid-i-Azam, or “Great Leader.” Jinnah now made a conscious effort to live up to the title. He staged a grand entrance to the Delhi meeting, parading 5 miles through the capital enthroned on the back of an open truck, his hand raised in a half-salute like Il Duce. Nehru and Gandhi were no longer the only ones who could draw a crowd. “On that day it was difficult to believe that the entire population of Delhi was not only Muslim but Muslim Leagu- ers,” one excited observer recalled.” Supporters were packed tightly along Jinnah’s route, and from balconies above women flung rose petals down at the Quaid. Fierce men in crisp, gray uniforms — members of the party’s private militia, the Muslim League National Guards — sur- rounded Jinnah with drawn swords. At the next League session, held in his seaside hometown of Karachi in December 1943, the Quaid arrived on a carriage decorated to resemble a sailing ship, drawn by thirty-one caparisoned camels.”’ While no doubt gratifying to his bruised ego, all this pageantry had


a hard-nosed political purpose as well. Jinnah could not be sure that Nehru and the other Congress leaders would remain behind bars. Jin- nah needed to establish himself and the League as an equal force as rapidly as possible. His most powerful weapon was Pakistan. “He ... preaches Pakistan with an intensity not unlike Hitler’s advocacy of na- tional socialism,’ reads a February 1943 report by the Office of Strategic Services (OSS), the forerunner of the Central Intelligence Agency.” “As far as Muslim India is concerned, we have forged our own charter and that is Pakistan,’ Jinnah repeatedly declared. “We are not going to budge an inch from the position we have taken. Nothing will make us swerve from our goal.””’ Jinnah batted aside all attempts to get him to sketch out his vision in more detail. Pakistan’s magic was as a fantasy —“a kind of Muslim Never- Never Land, a fairy tale Utopia,” the OSS called it.”* Ifno one could say what it was, everyone could see what they wanted in it. Landlords envi- sioned rich fields being added to their holdings. Farmers imagined a life free of Hindu moneylenders. Bureaucrats saw themselves ascending to senior posts. Mullahs pictured a society lived according to the Koran. An American diplomat who met with League leaders in the Punjab capital of Lahore reported that they did not seem to have the foggiest idea of what an independent Muslim nation would entail: their demand was “clearly emotional rather than rational.” That was the point. At bottom, Jinnah was promising his followers the same vague but pow- erfully attractive thing as Nehru —a future in which they controlled their own destiny. As an airy vision, Pakistan would prove to be dra- matically effective: the League grew from 112,078 members in 1941 to an estimated 2 million in 1944.”° Jinnah’s personal stature swelled along with the party’s membership rolls. Watching all this from his prison cell, Nehru grew more and more outraged. He and the other Congress leaders — except for Gandhi, who was confined in one of the Aga Khan’s palaces in Poona— spent the war imprisoned in the imposing fort at Ahmednagar, 160 miles west of Bombay. The barracks had been converted into makeshift cells, sepa- rated by 7-foot-high wooden partitions. The rooms lacked ventilation, electric lights, or fans. Windows had been bricked up. “Very cheerless


JINNAH AND JAWAHARLAL «+ 43 and uncomfortable- OOM EH Nehru judged in one of his first diary en- tries from the prison.’ This spell in prison was his longest yet — 1,040 days, almost a full three years — and in many ways, the most frustrating. Outside the walls of Ahmednagar, a new world was being born; inside, Nehru had to con- tent himself with tending a prison-yard garden, his pebble collection, and a stray cat he nicknamed Chando. Banalities and day-to-day details pepper his diary: 1 January 1943 Felt unwell 30 January 1943 Sowed carnation seeds in box. New canvas shoes 12 April 1943 New canvas shoes 13 April1943 Rain — rain — continuous rain! The monsoon s May1944 The cat tragedy! Poor Chando hit inadvertently over head by cook — concussion of the brain. Hovering between life and death 14 May1944 Cat Chando died in hospital 20 June1944 Newcanvas shoes” The journals also betray a mounting sense of anger at Jinnah. In Neh- rus mind, the Quaid had replaced the British as the figure most respon- sible for India’s continued thralldom. Jinnah’s Pakistan was “mad and foolish and fantastic and criminal and ...a huge barrier to all progress,” Nehru fumed. He found Jinnah’s speech at the Delhi League meeting, which had lasted for three hours, “blatant, vulgar, offensive, egoisti- cal, vague.... What a man! And what a misfortune for India and for the Muslims that he should have so much influence!” The Quaid’s ris- ing profile Nehru attributed purely to “opportunism raised to the nth degree, pomposity and filthy language, abuse ... a capacity for what is considered ‘clever’ politics, vulgarity ... total incomprehension of the events & forces that are shaping the world, 8c, &c.”” Much worse was that Jinnah had, to Nehru’s mind, transformed the once-glorious freedom struggle into a squalid sectarian feud between Hindus and Muslims. “What a lot Jinnah & his Muslim League have to answer for!” Nehru wrote in September 1943. “They have lowered


the whole tone of our public life, embittered it, increased mutual dis- likes and hatreds, and made us contemptible before the outside world.” By the end of 1943, almost four full years before Partition, Nehru was already tempted to give the Quaid his Pakistan. Allowing Jinnah to run his own little country might at least “keep [him] far away and [prevent] his muddled and arrogant head from interfering continually in India’s progress.”"°° Like the irksome “Hindu-Muslim divide” Nehru just wanted his rival to go away. The Quaid drummed his long, bony fingers on the table and watched the hands on the clock tick toward nine. A black telephone sat on the desk before him like a silent reproach. The clock hands kept moving, as did the Quaid’s fingers. The phone did not ring. Jinnah called for his secretary and furiously dictated a note, ad- dressed to the premier of the mighty Punjab province, Sir Malik Khizar Hayat Khan Tiwana. Khizar was a slim, forty-four-year-old landowner, given to wearing enormous white turbans crowned by a single peacock feather; his family had roots in the Punjab going back to the fifteenth century. Like the leaders of the other “Pakistan” provinces, he supported the Quaid and the Muslim League in theory. But the Punjab was a spe- cial case. Although Muslims formed a slight majority of the population, they could not have governed the province without the cooperation of its powerful Hindu and Sikh communities. Factions representing all three groups ruled together in a so-called Unionist coalition, with Khi- zar at its head. To maintain harmony, the Unionists focused on practical mat- ters — taxes, grain prices, pensions — and avoided the political argu- ments that divided Hindus and Muslims elsewhere in the country. Khi- zar did not spend much time talking about Pakistan, which his Muslim predecessor as premier had privately mocked as “Jinnistan.”*”* Despite his newfound clout, Jinnah remained paranoid about any challengers to his authority. Already Leaguers elsewhere were murmur- ing about how the Punjab’s Muslims were flouting the Quaid’s authority. Jinnah spent the last week of April 194.4 in the Punjab capital, Lahore, arguing with Khizar over his divided loyalties and demanding that he pledge unconditional fealty to the League. Khizar had ignored Jinnah’s


JINNAH AND JAWAHARLAL 45 27 April deadline for a response; when the Quaid’s note arrived later that evening, Khizar refused to accept it. Jinnah tried to deliver it twice more, even sending the letter back to Khizar’s bungalow in the hands of two top aides.'** After midnight, the League leader called in a rage. “You are heading for disaster,’ he told Khizar before slamming down the receiver. “I wish you Godspeed.”*”” Much more was at stake in the Punjab than Jinnah’s slighted pride. Without the province, Pakistan would bea shell. A vast network of Brit- ish-designed canals had transformed the Punjab’s scrub desert into some of the most fertile land on the subcontinent. Its recruiting grounds were the mainstay of the Indian Army: of the more than 2.5 million Indians who served during World War II, nearly a million were Punjabis.’ In the Rawalpindi district, one out of every two adult males took up arms for the empire.’”” Sind, Baluchistan, and the Northwest Frontier — the other three provinces slated for the western half of Pakistan — together boasted only about 8 million people. The Punjab housed more than 28 million.*”° Jinnah’s Congress rivals appreciated the Punjab’s importance as well as he did. When they were released after the fall of Hitler, Nehru and his compatriots quickly took stock of the changed political landscape. Jinnah could no longer be dismissed as a nonentity. If they wanted to prevent Pakistan, they would have to expose its inherent flaws. In September 1945, with a new Labour government in power in Lon- don talking about granting India her freedom, Nehru laid out the ofh- cial Congress position on Pakistan. No Muslim areas would be forced to remain part of India if they were determined to secede. Congress leaders could not “think of compelling people in any territorial unit to remain in the Indian Union against their declared and established will.”"”’ At the same time, however, Nehru seized on a demographic real- ity that had always undermined Jinnah’s case for Pakistan. In the Pun- jab and Bengal — by far the biggest and richest of the Pakistan prov- inces — non-Muslims nearly equaled Muslims in numbers. Muslims were a clear majority only in the western half of the Punjab and the east- ern half of Bengal, which did not include Calcutta. The Quaid, Nehru argued, could hardly expect to include the predominantly non-Muslim halves of either province in his Pakistan if they did not wish to join.


Such a truncated Pakistan, Jinnah believed, would hardly be viable economically; he dismissed it as “a shadow and a husk, a maimed, mu- tilated and moth-eaten” state.'°* And that’s just what Nehru wanted it to be —an unattractive prospect that might lead Muslims back to the idea of a united India. Some Congress members urged Nehru to sit down with Jinnah and work out a more amicable compromise. “Never!” Nehru snapped at a tempestuous party meeting in Bombay. “We shall face the Muslim League and fight it.”*”” He would get his chance. The British insisted that Indians first sort out their competing claims democratically before negotiating indepen- dence. Elections were called for the provincial legislatures and Central Assembly in India during the winter months of 1945-1946. The Punjab’s British governor, Sir Bertrand Glancy, feared that League electioneers would deliberately inflame passions in his province: “The uninformed Muslim will be told that the question he is called on to answer at the polls is —‘Are you a true believer or an infidel and a traitor?’”*’° Indeed, one Punjabi mullah warned that any Muslims who did not vote for the League and Pakistan would be “fuel for the fires of Helles League volunteers in the Punjab were told to parade the Koran and hold rallies in mosques and shrines, even to lead prayers “like Holy War- riors.”""” Many Sufi saints, or pirs, issued fatwas saying that the “Mus- lim League is the only Islamic community and ... all the rest are Kafirs [unbelievers].”""* Their followers listened. In some districts, the League won three-quarters of the Muslim vote. Even the whiskey-drinking, chain-smoking Jinnah emerged as a mes- sianic figure. Near the end of the campaign, a League worker named Habib proudly described to Jinnah’s secretary how Islam had become inseparable from the idea of Pakistan in the minds of Punjabi villagers. “They think that the League wants to establish a Muslim State.” Habib wrote, “and about Quaid-i-Azam they think that he is some big moulvi who has a long beard and is very religious.” At one village, an old man proudly claimed he had resisted pressure to support the Unionists be- cause he knew “if he voted against the League his eiman [faith] would be in danger.”*"* Across the province, fired-up League supporters began asking “when


JINNAH AND JAWAHARLAL © 47 jihad would be declared,” and warning the Punjab’s Hindus and Sikhs that “Pakistan would soon be a reality, that the only laws that would pre- vail in a short time would be the Muslim laws of the Shariat, and [that] non-Muslims would have to bring their complaints to the mosques for settlement.”*”* Yet the vote was close. While the League emerged as the largest single party, it fell just short of a majority in the Punjab legislature — and unsurprisingly could find no Hindu or Sikh allies to help form a government. In Lahore, Khizar survived as the head of a shrunken and fragile Unionist coalition. Publicly Jinnah touted the “knockout blow” that his party had deliv- ered to Nehru’s Congress. The League had thoroughly dominated the Muslim vote nationally, winning all but one of the Muslim seats in the Central Assembly and taking control of Sind and giant Bengal. Still, the Quaid knew it wasn’t enough. At the end of March 1946, he met with Lt.-Gen. Sir Arthur Smith, the deputy commander in chief of the Indian Army, to discuss Pakistan’s defense needs. Tensions were rising around the postwar world. That same month, Churchill first warned of an “iron curtain” descending across Europe. Newspapers ran alarmist maps with great swooping arrows indicating a possible Red Army thrust toward Tehran. Smith was categorical in his opinion. Unless Pakistan included a// of the Punjab and Bengal — especially Calcutta, which accounted for 85 percent of India’s engineering capacity and half of its sea trade —Jin- nah’s state was unlikely to survive.’ Even with those areas, Smith did not believe Pakistan could defend itself against a Soviet invasion alone. If he was right, he concluded in a confidential analysis written at Jin- nah’s request, “the case for Pakistan falls to the ground.”"”” At this moment, barely a year before independence, Jinnah essentially gave up the demand for Pakistan —a fact not stressed in Pakistani text- books. In the spring of 194.6, Clement Attlee’s British government pro- posed a complex compromise. India would remain a sovereign whole but with a weak central government controlling only defense, foreign affairs, and communications like the telegraph and rails. Individual provinces would hold the vast majority of powers. At the same time, the populations of Sind, Punjab, Baluchistan, and the Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP), and in the northeast


those of Bengal and Assam, would get to vote on whether they wanted to band together and create semiautonomous administrations oversee- ing their two regions. Jinnah would get a sort of “Pakistan Lite.” In- dia—and most importantly for British defense planners, the Indian Army — would remain united. So would the Punjab and Bengal. The only alternative, the British insisted, was the truncated, half- sized, dangerously vulnerable Pakistan Jinnah had already considered and rejected. Emotions were still running high after the hard-fought elections, and the Quaid had not prepared his followers for compro- mise. But he knew he had to take the deal. One British official who met with Jinnah found him “nervous and edgy, less in command of himself than I had seen him before... . For the first time he was fearful of meet- ing the Muslim League [leadership].”"** At a raucous, closed-door ses- sion in Delhi on 5 June, speaker after speaker rose to challenge Jinnah and ask how they could possibly accept an ersatz Pakistan given all that the Quaid had promised them. This was just a “first step,’ Jinnah protested. Once the Pakistan re- gional groups were established in the northwest and northeast, nothing would stop them from seceding later. He compared the fragile plan toa ship. “We can work on the two decks, provincial and group,” he urged, “and blow up the topmast” at any time.’ He won the vote, but at a cost. Given the extensive network of Con- gress spies, some version of the Quaid’s remarks most likely filtered back to Nehru. Like Jinnah, he was being pressed by supporters not to accept the British compromise. Congress Socialists —a rising faction within the party — had taken Nehru’s bombastic speeches literally. They had expected to win a strong state unfettered by ties to the empire, and cer- tainly not hobbled by Jinnah’s shadow Pakistan. Nehru tried to defend his own reluctant acceptance of the British plan. “When India is free, India will do just what it likes,’ he insisted at a Congress meeting in Bombay on 7 July. “We are not bound by a single thing”””® He repeated his faux pas at a press conference a few days later. Jinnah immediately cried foul. Perhaps he should have ignored Neh- rus logorrhea, which another Congress leader attributed to “emotional insanity.””’ But the Quaid’s leadership had always been based partly on


JINNAH AND JAWAHARLAL «+ 49 bluff, partly on his image as an inveterate defender of Muslim rights. He could not afford to have that reputation challenged so publicly. On 26 July, Jinnah called reporters to his stately Malabar Hill man- sion. Nearing his seventh decade, he remained a legendarily natty dresser. Margaret Bourke-White remembered him wearing a perfectly tailored gray suit. His tie and socks matched his silver hair.’ Jinnah spoke in a curiously hushed smoker’s rasp. Nehru and the Congress Party were not the only ones who could credibly threaten a rebellion, the Quaid told the assembled journalists. Muslims, too, could take their cause to the streets. “Why do you expect me alone to sit with folded hands? I also am going to make trouble,’ he declared.'”? The next day, in a hall lined with green bunting and beneath a heroic, enlarged portrait of himself, Jinnah told the League leadership that he was reject- ing the British compromise and calling for “direct action” to win a fully sovereign Pakistan. The campaign would kick off three weeks later, on 16 August. This time the Muslim dignitaries roared in approval — one “with such vehemence,’ an observer recalled, “that his dentures parted »124 from his gums and found a resting place in the palm of his right hand.


Chapter 2: Madhouse

HIS PLANE CIRCLED over the airport in Peshawar, Az of the Northwest Frontier Province, Nehru could see a churning mob lining the edges of the runway. The protest- ers were waving spears and steel-tipped lances, as well as black Muslim League flags. Bullets whistled past as the aircraft came in for a landing. Nehru had to sneak into town using side roads to avoid the scrum. It was an ignoble entrance for India’s de facto prime minister.’ Exactly two months had passed since the Great Calcutta Killing. Until this point, Nehru had rarely if ever met with an Indian crowd that was not delirious in its love for him. The Islamic warriors of the NWFP — the forebears of the Taliban — proved a rude shock. On his five-day October visit to the tribal areas along the border with Afghani- stan, the Congressman met with hostility nearly everywhere he went. At his first tribal jzrga, four hundred long-bearded elders stood up from the hard, rocky ground and stalked off before Nehru had a chance to speak. At the second, he tried to explain that he had come to the frontier with “love” in his heart. “We will talk to Mr. Jinnah if we want to discuss Indian politics” a Wazir tribesman snarled back.’ Just days before, the League had at last agreed to join Nehru’s interim government. The marriage was forced and uneasy. Wavell had had to ex- pend a great deal of energy nudging the two sides together. “It is weary


MADHOUSE © 51 work negotiating with these people,’ the viceroy wrote in his journal. “It takes weeks or months to make any progress on a point which ordinary reasonable men would settle in an hour or so.”> Among other things, Jinnah had demanded an equal stature to Nehru’s in the cabinet, an even split of the most powerful portfolios, and a veto over future cabinet ap- pointments. The Congressmen had rejected all his conditions. The League finally joined the government anyway to prevent their rivals from cementing their grip on the levers of power. The move was bla- tantly cynical. Jinnah nominated mostly nonentities for cabinet posts, still unwilling to serve under Nehru himself. When they met to finalize the arrangements, Wavell had pleaded with the Quaid to approach the new coalition in a friendlier spirit. The whole point was to set aside the larger acrimony over Pakistan and con- centrate — as the Unionists in the Punjab had for years — on more pro- saic matters of administration. Wavell specifically urged Jinnah, in the interests of harmony, not to do anything to disrupt Nehru’s frontier trip. Jinnah had worded his reply carefully: “No instructions to stage demon- strations have been issued in this connection to our organization.”* This was legalistic quibbling. As Nehru quickly discovered, Jinnah’s reassurances were meaningless. Descending from the Khyber Pass, the bloodstained gate to the subcontinent, Nehru’s convoy passed through a narrow defile. Tribesmen lined the dun-colored hills on either side. One turbaned fighter picked up a heavy stone and hurled it, smashing a car window. Another emulated him, and another. “The breaking of glass seems to send people mad,” NWFP governor Sir Olaf Caroe later wrote to Wavell. Nehru’s Khyber Rifles escort had to open fire to drive off the attackers.” The next day, Nehru visited the Rifles headquarters at Malakand Fort, high up in the pine-forested Hindu Kush. As his convoy exited the massive gates of the fort, two dented buses suddenly rumbled to life ahead of them and blocked the road. Bearded tribesmen poured out of the vehicles. They quickly surrounded Nehru’ car, shattering its win- dows with rocks. One of Nehru’s companions grabbed a revolver from a guard and screamed at the mob to back off. Sepoys raced out of the fort to help.®


Nehru suffered only a few bruises and nicks. But the photos of his battered car in Life magazine the following week made clear just how lucky he had been. The mob could easily have lynched him. Furthermore, he was convinced the tribesmen’s anger had not been spontaneous. “There can be no doubt that all these demonstrations were League-organised,” Caroe later admitted to the viceroy.’ During the weeks of limbo after the Calcutta Killing, young radicals in the League had begun pushing Jinnah to employ rougher tactics in the fight against the Congress. British intelligence reports claimed that in early September, at a secret meeting of party leaders called to discuss the plan for direct action, there had been “loose talk” of buying arms from Mus- lim princes around the subcontinent. Some League firebrands had even argued for establishing covert terror squads —as Jewish fighters were then doing in Palestine — to carry out bombings and sabotage across the country.” Even if party leaders stopped short of sanctioning violence, such talk was dangerous. One of the League’s young hotheads — the pir of Manki Sharif, a volatile twenty-three-year-old frontier mullah — had preceded Nehru into the tribal areas. “There are secret attempts to bring you also under Hindu domination,” he had warned the already suspicious Pathans.” The tribesmen were an excitable and easily roused audience. Nehru had walked into a trap. Obviously, Nehru archly told Wavell upon his return to Delhi on 22 October, the experience had not “produced any feeling of assurance in me about the future conduct of the Muslim League.’"® A week ear- lier, just before he left for the tribal areas, Nehru had received sketchy reports from the heavily Muslim eastern reaches of Bengal. Gangs of local Muslims there had allegedly gone on a rampage against the area's tiny Hindu minority. Thousands, perhaps tens of thousands, of refugees were fleeing the roving mobs. Now, bruised and bandaged after his fron- tier tour, Nehru had no doubt the Bengal disturbances, too, were being directed by the League. To his eyes, Jinnah’s party looked to be pursuing a double policy, try- ing to sabotage the same government they had just joined in Delhi by spreading chaos out in the provinces. His new colleagues in the cabinet were openly boasting about their plans to undermine Nehru. They had


MADHOUSE © 53 only taken up their posts “to get a foothold to fight for our cherished goal of Pakistan,” one of them declared.” Rather than bringing the two sides together, Wavell’s jury-rigged coalition was only driving them fur- ther apart. The day Nehru flew back to Delhi, Lt-Gen. Roy Bucher stood on the bow of an ancient paddle steamer as it nosed into the river port of Chandpur in eastern Bengal. Here in the world’s greatest riverine delta, the mighty Ganges and Brahmaputra meet and roll down to the sea to- gether. In the predawn gloom, Bucher noticed something strange: their waters refused to mingle. Off the port side he could see the Brahmapu- tra running clear. The Ganges flowed to starboard, brown and muddy. It was as if nature herself wished to send an ill omen. Despite the hour, chaos engulfed the docks. Bucher — the officer who had quelled the Calcutta riots — watched as a raggedly dressed crowd scrabbled for position. By their dress they appeared to be Hin- dus, mostly men, skinny and sun-dark. They had a hunted look. They struggled over one another to clamber onto the boat as Bucher and his aide-de-camp disembarked. A harried steamer agent told Bucher that in the last week, more than thirty thousand Hindu refugees had swelled the population of Chand- pur, a transshipment point for the rice and jute grown across the Bengal delta.’* Many were trying to flee to the safety of Calcutta. Strangely, the agent added, in recent days, hundreds of other Hindus had arrived from Calcutta. The newcomers were clad in a bizarre collection of uni- forms — jungle green, khaki, “even pink, he said.’* Several were army soldiers on leave. These “aid workers” were headed where Bucher was: further east, to the district of Noakhali. The tales of slaughter and rape that had reached Nehru in Delhi had emerged from this lush, remote area. Noakhali was hard to reach even in the dry winter months, when farmers worked their tiny plots of land. Now, at the tail end of the monsoon season, a glassy sheet of rainwater submerged the entire delta. Peasants got around by hand-poled skiffs, or by walking along the raised earthen bunds that divided their fields. Logs and rough-cut bamboo poles served as bridges.'* The only thing that traveled freely in this landscape was rumor. The


initial “eyewitness” accounts of violence had been hysterical. On 15 Oc- tober, a local member of the Hindu Mahasabha, the country’s largest sectarian Hindu party, had returned to Calcutta from Noakhali. “Thou- sands of [Hindu] women have been carried away, he told reporters. “At least 10,000 have been subjected to forcible conversion, and atrocities of an indescribable nature have been perpetrated on many of them.” A day later a telegram from Chandpur warned that a bloodthirsty mob was marching on the town. If air force planes did not arrive urgently to strafe the marauders, the sender warned, Chandpur’s Hindus would be finished."° Nehru had taken such reports seriously. “The accounts we have re- ceived and are receiving from hour to hour are incredible, and yet there can be little doubt that they are largely true,’ he wrote to Wavell on 15 October, angrily demanding that the viceroy — who remained con- stitutionally responsible for law and order in India—take action.” Back in August, just days after the Calcutta riots had burned themselves out, Bengal’s roguish League premier H. S. Suhrawardy had seemed to threaten exactly this sort of pogrom. Once Muslims decided to avenge their dead, “there [would] not be a single Hindu left alive in eastern Bengal, he had said ominously.”* Congress leaders, including Nehru, would put nothing past Suhrawardy and his henchmen. The man leading the Noakhali death squads, Ghulam Sarwar, was a local League strongman. His goondas were reportedly forcing Hindus to wear caps emblazoned with pro- Pakistan slogans, to show that they had “converted” to Islam.’? Mus- lims made up 80 percent of the dirt-poor population in eastern Ben- gal, and in many cases resented the richer Hindu minority who lived among them. The idea that the majority could be manipulated to rise up against their envied neighbors seemed entirely plausible. Yet by recklessly fanning outrage over the attacks around the country, Nehru’s Congress colleagues only made matters worse. They inflated scraps of rumor into evidence — widely believed but unfounded — of a rural holocaust. The leader of the Congress chapter in Bengal insisted that at least five thousand defenseless Hindus had been slaughtered in the first six days of unrest.”° J. B. Kripalani, who had replaced Nehru as the Congress Party presi-


MADHOUSE er WSS dent, issued even more inflammatory estimates. After flying over No- akhali, he judged the chaos to be worse than the devastating 1943 fam- ine in Bengal, which had claimed an estimated 3 million victims. When asked what proof he had for such comparisons, Kripalani dodged the question, saying that if all the Hindus forcibly converted, and all the women raped had instead been killed, that would have been a “lesser tragedy” than surrendering meekly. In any case, he added dismissively, the government’s much lower casualty figures obviously could not be trusted.” To be sure, violence was widespread: Bucher estimated that per- haps two thousand homes and shops had been burned and around two hundred Hindus had been killed across Noakhali and the neighboring district of Tipperah. But by the time he arrived, his troops had largely regained control of the district. Rather than a mass uprising, he found that a few hundred thugs had conducted the bulk of the raids. Their ringleader, Ghulam Sarwar, was arrested that afternoon. No more than two forced marriages were ever authenticated, al- though shame probably prevented most rapes from being reported.” Many of those Hindus who had supposedly been “converted” had simply been forced to repeat the kal/ma, the Muslim statement of faith. (Others had been made to eat beef or had slabs of the forbidden meat thrown into their homes.) Most quickly went back to worshipping their many-armed gods again. At this point, the bigger problem seemed to be the flood of Hindu “volunteers” that the steamer agent had reported to Bucher. They were spreading into villages unaffected by the violence, terrifying local Hin- dus with tales of Muslim killers lurking in the groves of coconut and betel nut trees. Thousands were fleeing unnecessarily, the men often leaving wives and children behind. “Many of the refugees,’ Bucher's aide judged, “appeared much more like well-fed citizens of Calcutta than people who had left everything in order to save their lives.””” Yet the conviction that a conflagration had engulfed eastern Bengal persisted, and persists to this day in most Indian histories. Where the numbers did not support that picture, Congress leaders like Kripalani resorted to moral arithmetic. One Bengali Congressman cast the battle against the League as a Manichean conflict, not unlike the way twenty-


first-century Western leaders would describe the struggle against Islamic jihadism: Dark forces — reactionary, counter-revolutionary and anti-social in nature — have been systematically organised ... under the Muslim League Ministry [in Bengal] and these dark forces have now declared a sort of total war on civilised ways of living and all that civilisation connotes. The Congress is the spearhead of civilisation and progress in India and it has no hesitation in taking up this challenge. After all, life is stronger than death and civilisation is mightier than barbarism. Life in Bengal will survive this shock and civilisation will withstand this onslaught.” In some ways Gandhi contributed more than anyone to this line of argument. The seventy-seven-year-old Mahatma seemed to take the Bengal violence personally. The journalist Phillips Talbot, who met with Gandhi at this time, sensed “a feeling of frustration, if not of fail- ure” in him.” He had always imagined that in his beloved villages, hum- ble Muslims and Hindus lived and would always live together peace- fully, as brothers. Now the very peasants whom he had championed as the “real” India appeared to have turned into brutal murderers. Clearly ahimsa — his creed of nonviolence —had not penetrated more than skin-deep. For the previous several weeks, the Mahatma had been living in Delhi to help in the coalition talks with the League. While in the capital he preferred to stay in a hut in a sweepers’ colony, home to Hindu Un- touchables, the lowest of the low. (Of course, his “hut” had been white- washed and outfitted with electricity and a phone: “If only that little man knew what it costs us to keep him in poverty,’ Sarojini Naidu cack- led.)”® At his evening prayer meetings, devotees pressed Gandhi to rush to Bengal to save Noakhali’s Hindus from “genocide.” The Mahatma implored Hindus not to seek revenge. But he did not challenge the idea that League Muslims had embarked on a full-fledged pogrom in eastern Bengal. Instead, he instructed Bengal’s Hindus to “die fearlessly” at the hands of their neighbors, without fighting back, to shame Muslims by their moral example. (Gandhi had offered the same advice to Jews facing the Nazi sword during World War II.) “There will


MADHOUSE © 57 be no tears but only joy if tomorrow I get the news that all three of you [have been] killed? he assured a trio of Bengali followers who were headed to the region on a mercy mission.”” Gandhi fixated in particular on the most incendiary allegations com- ing out of Noakhali— the vastly overhyped stories about rapes and ab- ductions of Hindu women. Although he surrounded himself with fe- male devotees and argued strongly for equality between the sexes, the Mahatma remained a late Victorian in his obsession with feminine vir- tue. Sex was forbidden in his ashrams, both in South Africa and India; he himself had taken a vow of celibacy at the age of thirty-seven, after fathering four sons, in the belief that “one who conserves his vital fluid acquires unfailing power.”** To Gandhi, the ideal Indian woman was cast in the mold of Sita, the god Ram’s blameless wife, who first walked on hot coals then meekly went into exile when her chastity had been questioned. Gandhi urged the Hindu women of Noakhali to remember “the in- comparable power of Sita.”” He wanted them to commit suicide rather than submit to their Muslim ravishers: they should “learn how to die before a hair of their head could be injured.” Perhaps they could “suf- focate themselves or . . . bite their tongues to end their lives,’ he advised. Told that such methods were impracticable, the Mahatma suggested the next day that they drink poison instead. “His was not an idle idea. He meant all he had said,” reads Gandhi’s own transcript of his comments.” Such talk kept emotions running high among Hindus. Jinnah’s comments did equally little to staunch the violence. He did not condemn the bloodshed for a full two weeks after the first raids were reported. When Wavell pressed him to speak out, the Quaid changed the subject to “Gandhi's ‘continuing outpouring of poison,” the vice- roy recorded.** When Jinnah finally did issue a statement, he did not admit any League responsibility for the Noakhali attacks. “It takes two to quarrel,” he churlishly reminded the Congress leaders, “and it is up to the leaders of both communities to put an end in the name of humanity to what is happening.” Nehru was in no mood for a lecture. He had judiciously remained silent about Noakhali while away touring the frontier. As soon as he returned, though, his frustrations mounted quickly. The addition of the


Leaguers virtually paralyzed the government. Nehru’s new Muslim col- leagues refused to acknowledge his authority, or to attend the teatime conclaves he had taken to holding in his office, where Congress min- isters tried to make policy decisions without the viceroy in the room. Deep within the bureaucracy, bitter sectarian camps had begun to form. “There is clear evidence that many Muslim clerks are ready, and even anxious, to hand over confidential documents to League officials,” the Intelligence Bureau warned.” Matters came to a head when Wavell suggested shifting the Home portfolio—which controlled the police and intelligence agen- cies — from the Congress to the League in order to balance out their responsibilities. After the disturbances in the NWFP and Noakhali, the idea of putting Jinnah’s men in charge of internal security seemed like rank hypocrisy to Nehru. The Congress high command plunged into hours of crisis talks, threatening to pull out of the government al- together if Wavell did not back down. (He did.) On 30 October, Nehru took to his bed, stressed and exhausted from the Delhi infighting. Nehru was certainly not about to let Jinnah off the hook for Noa- khali. Even if not every charge could be substantiated, the League seemed to be quite obviously intent on driving a wedge between Hin- dus and Muslims. “What has happened in other parts of India and more so in Eastern Bengal has been so ghastly that it is even sufficient to wake up the dead,” Nehru told reporters in Calcutta on 2 November. He had flown to the Bengal capital with a joint delegation of League and Con- gress ministers, ostensibly to show solidarity and call for calm. But he wanted the journalists to know he saw through Jinnah’s game: “I am not dead,” Nehru assured them. “I am very much alive.”** In the latter half of October, just as the uproar over Noakhali was peak- ing, police in the United Provinces noted a disturbing trend: the Hindu Mahasabha and other orthodox Hindu parties, which previously “had very little following or political influence,” were coming “out into the open, and... rallying Hindus all over the country to fight Islam.”*’ Tales of Hindu women being violated by Muslims were a powerful recruiting tool.


MADHOUSE «= 59 Before the war, far-right Hindus had established a pseudo-militant organization —the Rashtriya Swayam Sevak Sangh (RSSS) — that took inspiration from Hitler’s Brown Shirts. They had mostly been a sideshow, parading around in khaki shorts and issuing Fascist salutes. During wartime, the British had banned any such “private armies” from wearing uniforms or drilling openly. Those regulations had expired in September 1946. Now, Noakhali propelled thousands of volunteers into the RSSS ranks. In the United Provinces alone, membership in the mi- litia grew to 25,000 by December 1946.** Instead of hopping around doing mass calisthenics, Hindu cadres began training secretly in the use of swords, rifles, and crude bombs. The United Provinces police noted one other unsettling trend in their report: a “disturbing departure for the east”— toward Bihar and Bengal —“of batches of volunteers belonging to the various communal organizations.” If the spread of such militias was not halted, the report warned, “communal anarchy” threatened.”” Nehru’s Congress could technically disclaim any responsibility for these Hindu vigilante groups. The party’s own “volunteers” really were unarmed: they were used mostly for relief work and keeping order at political meetings. But after Noakhali, the line dividing the national- ists from the Hindu supremacists grew fuzzier, especially among the lower ranks of both organizations. In the autumn of 1946, “Congress party opinion began to express itself in anti-Moslem (rather than anti- League) terms, New York Times reporter George Jones recalled in a memoir, “partly, no doubt, because a number of militant Hindus found it politically expedient to ... join the Congress party bandwagon.” In their foaming outrage over the Noakhali attacks, Jones continued, “it became rather difficult to differentiate between the frankly communal response” of Congress and the Mahasabha.”* The line between the two groups virtually disappeared in Bihar, where a Congress ministry held power. Hindus outnumbered Muslims seven to one in the predominantly rural province, which had witnessed some of the bloodiest fighting during the 1942 Quit India riots. Several districts had successfully resisted government control for months. Now, at the end of October 1946, the province was again seething. Many Bi-


hari Hindus had worked in Calcutta and brought home graphic tales of the killings there. Scattered stabbings of Muslims were being reported in the capital, Patna, and other towns. Without consulting party leaders in Delhi, the Bihar Congress min- istry decided to designate 25 October as “Noakhali Day.” All around the province, mass rallies were staged to commemorate the “martyrs” of eastern Bengal. Speaker after speaker — including local politicians from both the Congress and the Mahasabha — accused Muslims of seeking to exterminate or drive out the Hindu population of Noakhali. Through staticky loudspeakers they cried for vengeance. Crowds took up the ugly chant “Blood for blood!””’ The next day, more stabbings were reported, and Muslim shops in the capital were set aflame. On 31 October, the at- tacks worsened dramatically, with forty Muslims killed at a train station south of the capital. At first Bihar officials tried to downplay the violence. After their one- day lightning visit to Calcutta, Nehru and the other cabinet ministers stopped off in Patna on 3 November to survey the situation. Authorities assured the delegation that the trouble was localized, spontaneous, and “certainly not organised.” They estimated the death toll at no more than 300 people, in a province with nearly 30 million inhabitants.” Troops had been called out, although outside of the cities, the army’s jeeps were having trouble slogging through the muddy landscape. The next day, however, just before Nehru was due to return to Delhi, air patrols reported that Hindu mobs up to five thousand strong were roaming the Bihar countryside. Peasant armies had gathered across the monsoon-flooded fields, carrying axes, spears, and torches. They were embarked on exactly the sort of pogrom they imagined had taken place in Noakhali. Compared to the free-for-all in Calcutta, this was a one-sided fight. Whole villages of defenseless Bihari Muslims were wiped out, corpses spread over half a mile or more. Mosques were desecrated and burned to ashes. Mobs laid siege to some Muslim hamlets for days at a time, and even attacked the police and military when they tried to escort terrified refugees to safety. The killers — simple Hindu farmers — were method- ical. Months later, one investigator found a few bloodstained planks nailed together amid the ruins of a Muslim village; it had been used as a


MADHOUSE « 61 butcher block to maim and behead victims, including children.” Inde- pendent estimates would eventually put the death toll at close to seven thousand Muslims. Nehru was appalled. He put offhis return to Delhi and threw himself into the effort to quell the violence. He raced from town to town, be- rating the crowds of Hindus who came out to see him. Why were they chanting useless slogans like “Jai Hind!” and “Mahatma Gandhi Ki Jai!” (Long Live Mahatma Gandhi!), he demanded to know, urging them in- stead to protect their Muslim neighbors. If any of them wanted to join the mobs, he declared, they would “have to murder Jawaharlal first and then, by trampling over his corpse. . . satisfy [their] lust for blood.”*” He threatened to have the police gun them down and the air force bomb them if they did not desist. Nehru urged Bucher — who had also arrived in Bihar —to use all necessary force to put down the mobs. It was no easy task. At one Mus- lim village, a platoon of Madrassi soldiers had to open fire to fend off several thousand frenzied Hindus. When he heard that one hundred of the attackers had been killed by the fusillade, Nehru wrote to Padmaja Naidu, “Would you believe it? I was greatly relieved to hear it!”*” During these few days, Bucher developed a lasting respect for Neh- rus courage. Flying over the unsettled countryside together, they came across mobs that had grown to fifteen thousand people or more. Bucher tossed teargas canisters out of the plane, to little effect. “Time and again, Jawaharlal said, “Try to land,” Bucher recalled years later. “Sometimes we did and, regardless of danger, [he] would jump out of the aircraft and rush towards any mobs in the vicinity.”* Another companion described to the New York Times’s George Jones watching Nehru accost the defi- ant ringleader of one posse and wrestle him to the ground, choking him nearly into unconsciousness.” Not even Nehru could stem the mobs’ bloodlust, however. The mood of the crowds that came out to see him became uglier. Some shouted “Go back!” and even “Jawaharlal Murdabad!” (Death to Jawaharlal!).”* He did not care. Before he had arrived in Bihar, Nehru had dismissed the League’s claims that a massacre was underway in the province. Now he wrote privately to his Congress colleagues in Delhi, “The real picture that I now find is quite as bad, and something even worse than anything


that they had suggested. ... There has been a definite attempt on the part of Hindu mobs to exterminate the Muslims. They have killed, in- discriminately, men, women and children en masse.’*” In a letter to Padmaja Naidu, he described the Hindu attacks as “the extreme of brutality and inhumanity.’** Calcutta had shown that fear could drive Hindus and Muslims to take up arms against one another. Bihar revealed a darker truth: where one community held an over- whelming majority, the killing quickly gained an unstoppable momen- tum. In a letter to the secretary of state for India, marked SECRET, a shocked Wavell admitted that the riots were “on the scale of numbers and degree of brutality, far beyond anything that I think has yet hap- pened in India since British rule began?” Yet if he felt sick at the Biharis’ behavior, Nehru would not accept the Congress's responsibility for it. He could “only explain all this by say- ing that a madness had seized the people,’ he wrote to his colleagues in Delhi.”° Nehru felt certain that some outside force must have perverted the villagers’ essentially peaceful natures. He praised the Bihar ministry fulsomely for taking firm action to suppress the violence. Ultimately, and astonishingly, Nehru decided that the culprit was the “unpatriotic and highly objectionable attitude of the Muslim League.””’ Hindu peasants must have been upset that Muslims — many of whom were landlords in Bihar — were blocking independence with the de- mand for Pakistan, and hence posing a “barrier to their social and eco- nomic hopes.” By the time the situation quieted and Nehru returned to Delhi, he was praising the “simple, peaceful and likable peasantry of Bihar,’ who although they had done “something dreadful, at least had desisted when told to do so.” This kind of sophistry incensed Jinnah and other Leaguers. They sent their own “fact-finding missions” into Bihar to interview refugees and came up with a much higher death toll of thirty thousand. Even if that number was exaggerated, the mountains of Muslim corpses in Bihar clearly dwarfed the few hundred Hindu dead in Noakhali. Congress leaders, including Nehru, nevertheless continued to lump the two episodes together, as though one balanced out the other. (Some Congressmen unhelpfully pointed out that while the death toll may have been higher in Bihar, more rapes were alleged in Noakhali.)*


MADHOUSE «= 63 Muslims deeply resented the fact that Gandhi had traveled to eastern Bengal at the beginning of November — when the violence there had ebbed — instead of to Bihar, which was then still out of control. The Mahatma argued that he could influence the Hindus of Bihar from afar, using moral persuasion. Bihari Muslims were not reassured. To add insult to injury, the instigators of the Bihar riots appeared to roam free. Just days later, in early November, Hindus in the Meerut dis- trict of the United Provinces turned on the Muslims among them, mas- sacring hundreds in the town of Garhmukteshwar. According to some reports, the RSSS had held rallies nearby to incite the killers.* Friends noticed a change in Jinnah after the Bihar riots. His anger and self-righteousness no longer seemed put on for negotiating pur- poses. One Briton who met the Quaid a few weeks later said he did not “ever remember seeing [Jinnah] before in a worse mood, from the point of view of reaching agreement with anyone over anything.””’ Any shred of trust the Quaid once had in Congress had disintegrated. “They are fooling the world,” he complained to Wavell on 19 November.”* For all of Gandhi’s and Nehru’s talk of nonviolence, how could Muslims believe any promises the Congress leaders might make about protecting them and their rights? The League’s toughs now had Jinnah’s ear. Before the war, the fierce, sword-wielding National Guards who surrounded the Quaid at public meetings had numbered less than two thousand nationwide. In October 1946, Jinnah appointed two new deputy commanders for the Guards.” The man made responsible for the “Pakistan” areas was a shadowy fig- ure named Khurshid Anwar, a Pathan from the Northwest Frontier Province. Described as “a complete adventurer,’ Anwar had reportedly served as a railway guard during the war.® According to one story, he had been dismissed for misappropriating mess funds; another claimed he had amassed a fortune from black marketeering.” Whatever the truth, Anwar’s main task was to expand the ranks of the Guards and to reorganize them as a proper armed militia — with uniforms, badges of rank, daily parades, and training in everything from lathis to swords and spears. “Some reports state that instruction is being given in the art of knife and acid throwing, and in the use of fire-arms,” a British intelligence brief added. Bihar provided a tremendous boost


to the League’s recruiting, just as Noakhali had for Hindu militants. By the end of 1946, the Guards’ ranks had grown from 1,500 to over 60,000 often fanatic members. At one meeting, an impressed British informant noted, “about 40 out of 100 applicants who signed enlistment forms with their own blood were accepted.” , The Guards deployed in force in Bihar, taking over the relief camps set up by the provincial government for Muslim refugees and demand- ing that all aid be funneled through them. They lost no opportunity to flaunt the suffering of Muslims. Visiting one camp, Bihar’s British governor found only a single League aid worker: “a youth whose activi- ties seemed to be confined to drafting manifestoes of a political nature.” This boy quickly rallied the refugees. They staged a demonstration for the governor’s benefit and were “ghoulish enough to dig up the bones and skulls of buried victims and strew them in my path,” he noted with a shudder.” Now, each side had its uniformed fanatics. And each side had po- litical leaders who fanned the flames with their rhetoric. League prop- agandists visited Muslim communities across northern India with photographs from Bihar of unburied skeletons and mutilated refugees, and with the charred pages of Korans they claimed had been burned by Hindu mobs. If they had been given no oxygen, the furies released by Calcutta might possibly have flickered out in distant Noakhali. Instead they now raced westward. In early December, tribesmen in the Hazara region of the NWFP descended on Sikh villages and slaughtered nearly two dozen of their inhabitants, prompting thousands of others to flee the area. If the trouble spread next door to the powder-keg Punjab, officials feared, it would be nearly impossible to stop. At the end of November, Jinnah’s old foe Khizar banned all demonstrations in his province — whether by Hindus, Sikhs, or Muslims. Such measures were too little, too late, Wavell knew. League officials in the Punjab had already begun stockpiling weapons and steel helmets, and recruiting Muslim university students for “underground and secret ”®* By December the Guards’ ranks in the province had doubled to nearly 23,000." Since August, the viceroy had been pressing Attlee’s cabinet to approve his “breakdown plan,’ which envisioned that the work.


MADHOUSE «© 65 British would concentrate their forces just on the most contentious provinces in northern India while turning over the rest of the subconti- nent to the Congress. He saw no other way to maintain order. The plan, he wrote, “might, from its nature, be called ‘Operation Ebb-Tide’”— a scheme to withdraw gracefully from an untenable position. Some wits in the Army allegedly gave the idea a more expressive name: Operation Madhouse.®” The roar of the York’s four engines made conversation nearly impos- sible. That suited its passengers just fine. Once the No Smoking light went off, Jinnah, sitting in the first row of the viceroy’s plane, lit up a State Express 555 cigarette and buried his hawklike nose in a new screed about Pakistan entitled 4 Nation Betrayed.®° Nehru was seated directly behind him, dressed in a suit and tie instead of his normal kurta; a recent back injury furrowed his brow in pain. To distract himself, he plowed through two novels on the long flight to Malta — Rosamond Lehmann’s The Ballad and the Source and one of Sinclair Lewis's last works, Cass Timberlane, the story of a doomed marriage between a fortysomething man of means and a beauty half his age. If the book reminded Nehru of Jinnah and Ruttie’s tragic romance, he did not let on. On Malta, where the York landed on three engines and could not go any further, the two rivals muttered only a couple of sentences to one another: JINNAH: Well, what have you been doing all day? NEHRU: Partly reading, partly sleeping, partly walking. Eventually another plane was found to finish the journey to London, where Prime Minister Attlee had invited the Indian leaders for last- ditch peace talks in early December. Wavell’s hopes for the interim gov- ernment had clearly failed. After less than six weeks of working together, relations between the Congress and the League were more acrimonious than ever. “Feelings of bitterness and animosity in Delhi are reaching a pitch possibly never experienced before,’ the capital's chief commis- sioner reported on 21 November.” Talk of civil war was growing louder. The political stalemate in its largest colony now threatened Britain's larger strategic interests. Wavell’s increasingly apocalyptic cables were


warning of chaos and a humiliating, potentially bloody withdrawal for British troops and civilians. Some of Attlee’s ministers wanted to hand power to Nehru and the Congress immediately and leave. Others, in- cluding Foreign Minister Ernest Bevin, thought any hint that Britain had been driven out of India would destroy its credibility as a great power.” The prime minister himself failed to understand why Indian politicians, after clamoring so long for freedom, refused to take it when offered. It was a fair question. If civil war really was looming, none of the Indian leaders appeared especially eager to prevent it. A couple weeks earlier, the viceroy’s private secretary, George Abell, had had dinner with Liaquat Ali Khan, Jinnah’s longtime deputy, and had gotten “the very clear impression from what Liaquat said that the League could not afford to let the communal feeling in the country die down.” Abell and other British officials generally found Liaquat, a jovial, fifty-year-old landowner, to be less confrontational than Jinnah. But the fighting sup- ported the League’s contention that Hindus and Muslims could not live together. It was further “proof of their case for Pakistan.” Nehru’s own deputy, Vallabhbhai Patel—a tough, seventy-one- year-old Gujarati lawyer whom Gandhi had nicknamed “Sardar, or “Chief” — was convinced that Muslims would only respond to strength. Patel was the real power in the Congress Party — the man who con- trolled the flow of cash from Hindu industrialists and who doled out rewards, and punishment, to local cadres. A widower like the rest of the top Indian leaders, he had reputedly learned of his wife’s death while arguing a murder case in court — and had continued with his cross-ex- amination. His eyes were heavy-lidded, almost sleepy; his lips full and feminine. In his homespun robes he was often compared to a Roman senator. Patel was a ruthless, unsentimental pragmatist and sympathetic — un- like Nehru — to the Mahasabha and the khaki-clad cadres of the RSSS. After Bihar, he noted with satisfaction, he detected among Leaguers “some realisation that violence is a game at which both parties can play.” Patel believed that Jinnah recognized the weakness of the Muslim po- sition and was “on the verge of settling” for something less than Paki- Stans


MADHOUSE ©« 67 The Sardar thought he knew the real reason Jinnah had agreed to travel to London —“to solicit Churchill’s help.”””! After the 1942 Quit India uprising, the Tory leader had developed a fixation about the treacherousness of Hindus —“a beastly people with a beastly religion? he averred—and the steadfastness of Muslims. He was a fan of the 1944 book Verdict on India by Beverley Nichols, a toxic rant against Hindus and Congress: “I agree with the book and also with its conclu- sion — Pakistan,” Churchill had written to his wife, Clementine, after finishing the tome.” The sight of a Nehru government ruling in Delhi had infuriated the Tory leader no less than Jinnah, and the rising death toll across India — now into five figures— seemed to confirm all of Churchill's dire predictions of what would come from Britain giving up the Jewel in the Crown. After a humiliating defeat in the 1945 British elections, Churchill had spent some time licking his wounds, painting landscapes at Lake Como and inveighing against Communism while touring the United States. Now he was ready to reenter the political fray, and was looking for a stick with which to poke his Labour rivals. When they finally arrived in London, Wavell accompanied Jinnah and Liaquat to dinner with several senior Conservative politicians. One of Churchill’s lieutenants leaned over and cheerfully confided to the viceroy that “Winston was anxious to make [India] a party issue.””* At the dinner, Jinnah spun out an argument he knew would appeal to his audience: Britain should not leave India now. “His theme song,’ one of the attendees noted, “is what he calls the deliberate butchery of Mus- lims by Hindus in Bihar.””* The British had a moral obligation to stay on and hold the ring between the warring communities until tensions had genuinely eased, Jinnah argued. Otherwise such massacres would only be repeated. A full-scale civil war would invite Soviet intervention. Jinnah kept hammering at this theme during his entire stay in Lon- don. Opinions of his motivations varied. Some observers thought he was hoping to buy time so that the League could build up its armed capabilities. Others sensed an exhaustion in the nearly seventy-year-old Quaid. “He himself admitted to me: he really thinks that if he holds out, Churchill’s line will prevail, and we [will] take over India long enough to see him — J — out,’ a young official who had served in India,


Maj. John McLaughlin “Billy” Short, wrote after spending time with the League leader in London.” The official talks focused on the “Pakistan Lite” compromise put forward the previous spring, and the question of how to form the Pak- istan “groups” in the northwest and northeast. The Congress argued that each province should get a single vote on whether it wished to join up; that would allow Assam and the Northwest Frontier Province, both then ruled by Congress ministries, to opt out. Jinnah and the League thought that the votes should go by population, so the wishes of citi- zens in bigger provinces like the Punjab and Bengal would receive due weight. Over two days of talks, Attlee sided with Jinnah’s interpretation. The whole point of the plan was to create enough of a semblance of Pakistan to convince Muslims to abandon the claim to their own state; all five provinces and Baluchistan had to be included. Nehru immediately left London in a huff. “Compulsion destroys cooperation,” he declared an- grily to Attlee in their last meeting.”° With all the transit delays, Nehru had spent more time getting to England — sixty hours — than he had in negotiations. (Somehow he did manage to find time to sit for the sculptor Jacob Epstein, who was carving his bust, three times in four days.) The quick collapse of the talks reminded Wavell of a couplet from Browning: Now, enough of your chicane of prudent pauses, Sage provisos, sub-intents and saving clauses! The viceroy recalled, too, how the poem began: “Let them fight it out, friend! Things have gone too far.””’ Jinnah himself did not seem terribly interested in his diplomatic vic- tory. As Nehru winged his way back to the subcontinent, the Quaid drove down to Chartwell, Churchill’s country estate. “I greatly valued our talk the other day,’ the Tory leader wrote to Jinnah afterward.” The two men clearly agreed that Attlee’s government was too hastily rushing to withdraw —“scuttling,” in Churchill’s cutting phrase — from India. . Churchill suggested they keep their discussions secret. “It would per-


MADHOUSE «© 69 haps be wiser for us not to be associated publicly at this juncture,” he wrote.” The two leaders established a covert channel of communica- tion in order to keep in touch, with code names and alternate addresses. Churchill would sign his secret missives “GILLIATT, he informed the Quaid, using his secretary Elizabeth’s last name. (The choice was about as sneaky as the moniker that Churchill, a former First Lord of the Ad- miralty, had used during wartime: “Former Naval Person.”) On 12 De- cember, the Tory leader rose in Parliament and thunderingly denounced Labour's plans to abandon the Raj: “In handing over the Government of India to these so-called political classes, we are handing over to men of straw of whom in a few years no trace will remain,” he declared. “Many have defended Britain against their foes; none can defend her against herself. But at least let us not add — by shameful flight, by a pre- mature hurried scuttle — at least let us not add to the pangs of sorrow so many of us feel, the taint and smear of shame.”*® Delighted, Jinnah and Liaquat stayed on in England for another fortnight, giving speeches to build support for their cause. If they wanted to have any chance at presiding over a free and united India, the onus was once again on the Congress to compromise. As soon as Nehru returned to Delhi, the American chargé d'affaires, George Mer- rell, cornered him. Throughout 1946 the United States had been trying to prevent a civil war from breaking out in China between Chiang Kai- shek’s Nationalists and Mao Zedong’s Communists. Washington feared a Hindu-Muslim conflict in India would “cause widespread chaos simi- lar [to] China which would last for many years and . . . have worldwide repercussions.” By comparison, the feelings of the few million citizens of Assam and the NWFP were trivial. Merrell’s argument struck home. By the end of December, Nehru had more or less agreed that Congress should reverse itself. He wrote out a new resolution, grudgingly accepting the British position on how to establish the Pakistan “groups.” A decision this important needed Gandhi's imprimatur, though. The Mahatma still had not returned from distant Noakhali. He had vowed to live as a mendicant in eastern Bengal, sheltering under the roofs of Hindus and Muslims alike, until Noakhali’s Hindus felt safe enough to return home and live at peace with their neighbors. If he could restore


harmony to Noakhali, Gandhi believed, the moral force of the example would quiet the turmoil spreading elsewhere in India. His admirers have mythologized this “last crusade” as a valiant, single-handed effort to heal the subcontinent’s gaping wounds. Their accounts describe the Mahatma like Jesus —a lonely figure striding barefoot from village to village, along paths strewn with shards of glass and piles of human feces by those whose hearts remained full of hate. At the time, though, just as many observers thought Gandhi had gone “dotty,’ as journalist Phillips Talbot noted.*” The Mahatma truly believed that “some grave defect in me somewhere” was to blame for the homicidal passions surging through India’s communities.*’ Around this time, he began his most controversial “experiment,’ an attempt to purify himself as a means of cleansing the nation’s soul. Each night, in whichever hut he happened to find himself, he would bed down, na- ked, with his eighteen-year-old grandniece Manu to reconfirm his vow of celibacy. “We both may be killed by the Muslims,” he told her, “and must put our purity to the ultimate test.’** Even the ever-loyal Nehru was “greatly troubled” by the practice, he wrote to Gandhi.” Nehru spent two days at the end of December conferring with Gan- dhi in a Noakhali hut. The Mahatma approved Nehru’s resolution but edited it to emphasize one fundamental point: whatever was ultimately decided, it “must not involve any compulsion of a province.”** Although he signed off on the language, Nehru privately dismissed the clause as ”*7 A relieved Washington hoped that the Congress acceptance, while muddled, would be good enough to re- vive the British compromise. nothing more than “a pious wish. Jinnah, however, had been emboldened by Churchill’s support. Through private channels, Tory leaders assured the League leader that they would support the establishment of a full and fully self-governing Pakistan if it remained part of the British Empire — as a dominion that pledged loyalty to the king, like Canada or Australia.** The Quaid was “very pleased at the results” of his trip to London, one friend noted.*” There seemed little reason not to keep holding out. Gandhi's obfuscating revisions to the Congress resolution gave Jinnah all the excuse he needed. The barnstorming in London had exhausted the League leader; he spent most of January 1947 in the village of Malir


MADHOUSE « 71 outside Karachi, resting and undergoing a Gandhi-style “nature cure.” At the end of the month, he roused himself from bed and summoned the League leadership to Karachi. They formally rejected the Congress resolution as insufficient and insincere. The stalemate would go on until the British and the Congress accepted reality, the Quaid declared. A united India was impossible: Pakistan — a real Pakistan — was the only answer. The American diplomat George Merrell was not alone in thinking that the Congress's pettifogging represented a colossal political failure, a missed opportunity that might well have averted the genocide that would unfold six months later.” At this point, the spreading violence had not yet spun out of control. A political deal might have restored harmony between India’s communities. But as the killings rolled west- ward, they were inching nearer and nearer to the province the India Of- fice described as the “most dangerous field for communal disturbances” in all of India, the Punjab.”* Delhi’s politicians, who continued to hurl the same wordy barbs at each other as they had for years, were running out of time. On 24 January, Khizar, the Punjab premier, had issued a new ordi- nance, banning both the RSSS and the Muslim League National Guards in his province. The Hindu and Muslim militias had been growing at a terrifying pace; authorities feared they would soon be too powerful to stop. A police raid that same day turned up two thousand steel helmets hidden in a storeroom at the Guards’ headquarters in Lahore. Authori- ties arrested several of the local League leaders, who had tried to block the search. In Delhi, Liaquat was “almost jubilant” at the news, Merrell re- ported.” Now the League, like the Congress, had its own political martyrs to tout. Even though the arrested Leaguers were released after forty-eight hours, the party gleefully launched its own civil disobedi- ence campaign against Khizar’s government. Day after day, processions of Muslims began marching through Lahore and other Punjab cities to challenge the official ban on demonstrations. The jails began to fill with Leaguers. There was something slightly comical about Jinnah’s first satyagraha.


Punjab authorities knew they didn’t have enough prison cells to detain all of the Quaid’s followers. So at each protest, authorities agreed to ar- rest only “certain named aspirants to political martyrdom,’ recalled Jack Morton, the senior superintendent of police in Lahore. “A great deal of orchestrated noise was then generated after which, honour having been satisfied, the crowds would be persuaded to go home.””’ Those de- tained would be treated to “discreet tea parties” in the police station and then eventually set free. Activists who proved more recalcitrant — in- cluding the ravishing, twenty-six-year-old Viennese wife of one senior Leaguer — were dropped off several miles outside of town and forced to walk home. Jinnah, however, was deadly serious. He saw a chance finally to seize political control of the Punjab — not to mention to avenge his 194.4 hu- miliation at Khizar’s hands. One older Leaguer from the Punjab visited Jinnah in Malir and tried to convince him that the demonstrations were in danger of becoming violent. Jinnah “just looked straight into his eyes and asked him if he was ill? a party activist later recalled. “The answer was, he was not. [ Jinnah’s] next [question] was then, why [was] he not in jail with his Leaders?”’* The Quaid ordered the man to return to Lahore immediately and get himself arrested. Khizar’s government seemed powerless to quell the disobedience movement. Local League officials easily rallied their troops from jail. Servants brought the ringleaders cooked food every day, with bulletins hidden in the handles of saucepans. Organizers gave out orders through a hole in the prison walls meant to drain rainwater. Muslim sympathiz- ers in the telephone department passed on directives secretly to Dawn, which printed them in the next day’s papers.” The longer this circus went on, the more apprehensive the Punjab’s Hindus and Sikhs grew. They resented the traffic-snarling League pro- cessions, and what the province's new governor, Sir Evan Jenkins, agreed were “intensely provocative” slogans chanted by the protesters.”° “Even among the more liberal of [the Leaguers] the line seems to be that having established undiluted Muslim rule [in the Punjab] they will be generous to the minorities,” Jenkins wrote to Wavell.’”? The sober and brilliant Jenkins, formerly the viceroy’s private secretary, was an old Punjab hand. He agreed with his predecessor, Sir Bertrand Glancy, who had warned


NASD HOOW SURF 16) 973 as early as August 1945, “If Pakistan becomes an imminent reality, we shall be heading straight for bloodshed on a wide scale; non-Muslims ... are not bluffing, they will not submit peacefully to a Government that is labelled “Muhammadan Raj.””® In particular, Jinnah had not accounted for a minority that, until now, had been a third party to the Muslim-Hindu struggle: the Punjab’s proud, aggressive Sikhs. The most prominent Sikh leader was “Master” Tara Singh, a sixty-one-year-old demagogue and head of the Akali Dal Party. (His imposing title actually referred to his time as a school princi- pal.) Singh had the long white beard of an Old Testament prophet and a fierce, almost unhinged devotion to the cause of Sikh rights. As his kirpan — the small, ceremonial dagger that every Sikh male is required to wear as part of his faith — Singh now strapped on a heavy, deadly looking sword. On tro February, a massive League procession marched through the center of Lahore. Demonstrators were in an ugly mood. The night be- fore, a brick had come flying into another League protest and killed one man. The crowd's hoarse jeers had a menacing edge to them. League leaders had ordered all shops and businesses in Lahore to close in mourning. When they reached the baroque High Court build- ing and found it still operating, enraged protesters slammed against its gates, then pushed aside the few guards and charged in. The mob rampaged through offices and courtrooms. A group of Muslim stu- dents made it to the roof and ripped down the Union Jack, replacing it with a League flag. Police reinforcements rushed into the fray. On the churned-up lawns outside, bewigged, black-robed barristers and scruft- ily dressed marchers stumbled about, coughing in a haze of teargas. After the High Court raid, the tenor of the League’s demonstrations grew noticeably nastier. Protesters began targeting Hindu and Sikh po- licemen, beating to death one constable and injuring fifty others on a single day.” On 12 February, Tara Singh exhorted Sikhs to revive under his leadership the small fighting units, or jathas, with which their com- munity had once conquered the Punjab. History remained a potent force among Sikhs, who adhered to a proud, martial faith. Many of their founding myths centered on the astoundingly nasty tortures suffered by their founding “gurus” at the


hands of Muslims. In the seventeenth century, the Mughal emperor Je- hangir had supposedly ordered burning sand poured over the fifth guru. Aurangzeb had the ninth guru beheaded. The nawab of Sirhind in the Punjab is alleged to have bricked up the tenth and last Sikh guru's two youngest sons — alive.'°° When Sikhs conquered the Punjab at the end of the eighteenth century, they wreaked a savage revenge. Among Mus- lims “the name of Sikhashahi— the Sikh Rule — is a synonym for mis- government and oppression . . . to this day,” Sir Olaf Caroe, the NWFP governor, wrote in a scholarly text."*" Jinnah should have known better than to stir up this hornet’s nest. As early as January 1939, a British intelligence report had predicted that the Punjab’s Sikhs would pose the biggest obstacle to an independent Muslim state. “History suggests that the Sikhs to a man would fight lit- erally to death rather than submit to Muslim domination? the report noted.’”* Since then, tens of thousands of Sikhs had trained and fought in World War II. Many had held on to their weapons and uniforms when they had demobilized. If Tara Singh wanted an army, he would not have to go far to find one.
