Chapter 1: FROM MINORITY TO NATION
SIX YEARS BEFORE IT APPEARED on the map of the world, Pakistan’s founding father, Mohammad Ali
Jinnah, denounced the Indian National Congress and right-wing Hindu organizations for hysterically
treating the proposed Muslim homeland as if it was “a nightmare or some dangerous animal.”
“Pakistan has been there for centuries,” he claimed, “it is there to-day, and it will remain till the end of
the world. It was taken away from us.” Jinnah saw no inconsistency in making an apparently separatist
claim to territories in the northwest and northeast of India and vowing never to let Muslim minorities
elsewhere in the subcontinent be “vassalised by the Hindu majority.” At the same time, he
emphatically rejected concerns about Pakistan’s inability to ward off a potential invasion from the
northwest. European powers, including “our British masters,” had invaded India from the coasts. Air
and not land or sea power had in any case become the decisive weapon in modern warfare. Muslims
and Hindus had to “live as good neighbours” and jointly tell the world, “Hands off India, India for the
Indians.”
With even the chief architect of Pakistan ambivalent about the link between Muslim identity and
territorial sovereignty, narrating the story of the nation and its nationalism has proven deeply
contentious for Pakistanis. Reconciling the imperatives of citizenship in a territorial nation-state with
the supraterritorial claims of Islamic universalism based on affinity to a worldwide Muslim
community was a challenging proposition. The territorial contours of the Muslim homeland would
leave almost as many Muslim noncitizens inside predominantly Hindu India as there were Muslim
citizens within, compounding the problems confronting Pakistan’s quest for an identity that was both
Islamic and national. The quest for a homeland for India’s Muslims was fundamentally different from
the Zionist movement for a Jewish homeland. There was no holy hill in Punjab or Bengal, nor in
Sindh, NWFP, or Balochistan, that beckoned the faithful. These were regions where Muslims
happened to be in a numerical majority, sharing cultural and linguistic bonds with Hindus and Sikhs.
Muslims forming a majority in these regions also shared a religious affinity with Muslims in Indian
provinces where they were in a minority and a vast worldwide community of believers beyond the
subcontinent.
An insistence on being treated on par with India, which continued to be referred to in popular
parlance and the vernacular press as Hindustan or Bharat, was a common refrain once Pakistan was
created. The delicacy of the issue prompted government officials to emphasize the country’s
distinctiveness by substituting the lessons of recent history with the political project of the
independent nation-state. This can be seen from the controversy generated over the definition of
Pakistan in the fourth edition of The Concise Oxford Dictionary. Initially published in 1951, the
shorter version of the prestigious English lexicon managed to cause offense eight years later when
someone discovered that Pakistan had been defined as “a separate Moslem State in India” or,
alternatively, as “Moslem autonomy” and “the independent Moslem Dominion in India.” Oblivious of
Jinnah’s reasons for opposing the designation “India” only for territories falling under the
jurisdiction of the Indian National Congress, the bearers of his mantle vented their anger at being
called a part of India by banning the dictionary. Oxford University Press admitted that the definition
was “tactless” but explained that the intention had been to show that Pakistan was geographically a
part of the Indian subcontinent, not that it was politically a part of India. It regretted that the correction
could not be made until the publication of the next edition.  Recognizing it as a case of overreaction,
the Pakistani government lifted the ban shortly afterward. The next edition of The Concise Oxford
Dictionary did not appear until 1964.
Even as they strove valiantly to project Pakistan’s identity as an Islamic entity distinct from Hindudominated India, the managers of the new state found themselves entangled in a fundamental
conundrum. No one was quite sure where exactly to begin tracing the origins of Pakistan. Should the
history begin with the creation of the country in 1947 or extend backward in time and, if so, how far?
Ideologically driven stalwarts of an Islamic Pakistan wanted to locate its genesis in the birth of Islam
on the Arabian peninsula or at the very least with the Arab invasion of India’s northwestern region in
712 CE. Others with a geographical and secular bent marshaled their own evidence about when the
seeds of Pakistan were first sown. In the initial years after independence when those holding secular
worldviews rather than Islamic ideologues were in the ascendance, official and quasi-official
histories took the 1857 revolt that marked the end of Mughal sovereignty as the point of departure to
begin charting the course to the creation of Pakistan.
An equally problematic, if potentially more divisive, issue related to the sacrifices made during
the struggle for Pakistan. Who were the heroes and martyrs and who had to be excluded or dubbed
villains and turncoats in official narrations of the nation? An intensely political enterprise that
paralleled regime changes, these decisions served to reduce historical thinking, both as knowledge
and as collective remembrance, to a series of bureaucratic conjuring tricks.  These official
manipulations did not go uncontested. But the preferred medium of social dissidence and resistance
was journalism and literature, rather than history. Without a well-developed tradition of either
professional or lay alternative popular histories, the state’s monopoly on official narrations of the
nation and its nationalism largely escaped systematic challenges. At the root of Pakistan’s national
identity crisis has been the unresolved debate on how to square the state’s self-proclaimed Islamic
identity with the obligations of a modern nation-state. This has been confounded by an official history
that cannot explain the gaping inconsistencies between the claims of Muslim nationalism and the
actual achievement of statehood at the moment of the British withdrawal.
The Demand for Pakistan
How did India’s Muslim minority get transformed into a nation and win territorial sovereignty within
just seven years only to end up being divided into two hostile states? A staunch anticolonial nationalist
who had devoted his life to the cause of winning freedom from the British, Jinnah in 1916 had hailed
the All-India Muslim League (AIML) as a “powerful factor for the birth of United India.”  Even as
late as 1937, he was more interested in forging a political alliance with the Congress Party at the allIndia level than striking dubious deals with Muslim politicians in the Muslim-majority provinces. It
was during his presidential address at the Muslim League’s Lahore session in March 1940 that Jinnah
first asserted that India’s 90 million Muslims were not a minority but a nation. He made the claim with
no reference to any Islamic convention. Instead, Jinnah took his cues from the contemporary
internationalist discourse on territorial nationalism and the doctrine of self-determination. Like any
other group claiming nationhood, Muslims wanted their own separate national home in the shape of
autonomous states in northwestern and northeastern India, where they were in a majority. Muslim
minorities in the rest of India were to be considered nationals of this Muslim homeland and their
rights and privileges safeguarded in the same way as those of non-Muslims living in the Muslim
territories. What was unacceptable was a spurious notion of democracy that allowed the Indian
National Congress to use the brute majority of the Hindu community to impose its will on the
Muslims. The political problem in India was not of an intercommunal nature as was commonly
believed. It was of a distinctly international character. In accordance with international norms of selfdetermination, the only logical solution was to divide India into autonomous states so that no nation
could try and dominate the other. This could facilitate reciprocal arrangements on behalf of
minorities and mutual adjustments between Muslim India and Hindu India.
If it embodied a separatist demand, the resolution adopted by the Muslim League in Lahore was
curiously ambiguous when it came to specifying the precise geographical boundaries of the Muslim
states it wanted to set up in northwestern and northeastern India where Muslims were in a majority.
There were other glaring inconsistencies. The League claimed to be speaking on behalf of all Indian
Muslims. Yet its objective, if realized, would leave a substantial number of Muslims outside the ambit
of Muslim sovereignty. A plurality of Muslim sovereignty was implicit in the resolution’s use of the
phrase “Independent States” even though the League’s propaganda revolved around the idea of one
Muslim state. There was no discussion of any future “center”—a reference to the central state
apparatus—whether Muslim or all Indian. The fourth paragraph of the resolution referred to “the
constitution” in the singular to safeguard the interests of both sets of minorities, Muslims in the
Hindu-majority provinces as well as non-Muslims living in the Muslim-dominated areas. This
implied some sort of an all-India arrangement to cover the interests of Muslims in the majority and
the minority areas. Consistent with this unstated assumption was the conspicuous omission of any
reference to either partition or “Pakistan.”
“Pakistan” and “partition” were not unfamiliar terms. Since the late 1930s, they had been regularly
bandied about in newspapers with reference to a number of Muslim schemes proposing imaginative
ways of power sharing by religiously enumerated “majorities” and “minorities” in an independent
India. Anxious not to be undone by the popular connotations of “Pakistan,” Jinnah avoided any
mention of it in the Lahore resolution. It was the Hindu press that “fathered this word upon us” he told
the AIML three years later.  This was a telling admission from someone dubbed the architect of
Pakistan. If Jinnah—the Quaid-i-Azam (great leader) as he came to be called—was initially reluctant
to be associated with “Pakistan.” Choudhary Rahmat Ali, a Punjabi Muslim who coined the name in
1933 while studying at the University of Cambridge in England, denied that his scheme for a Muslim
state extending from the Bay of Bengal all the way to the Bosphorus had anything to do with the
Muslim League’s 1940 resolution. Literally, the “land of the pure,” “Pakistan” is an acronym for
Punjab, Afghanistan (including the NWFP), Kashmir, Sindh, and Balochistan.
The lineage of Rahmat Ali’s “Pakistan” scheme, though not its form or substance, is traceable to
the ideas of another Punjabi Muslim—the celebrated poet and philosopher of the East, Muhammad
Iqbal. In his presidential address to the AIML in December 1930, Iqbal had proposed consolidating
Muslim power in the northwest of the subcontinent as the solution to the problem of power sharing in
India. Unlike Rahmat Ali’s scheme for a separate and sovereign “Pakistan” linked to smaller
sovereign Muslim polities in the rest of India, Iqbal’s Muslim state was to remain part of the
subcontinental whole. Ruling out any physical division, Iqbal called “India … the greatest Muslim
country in the world.” The “centralization” of the Muslim-majority provinces of Punjab, Sindh, the
NWFP, and Balochistan, whose military and police services were indispensable to British rule, would
“eventually solve the problem of India as well as of Asia.”  Far from aspiring to hold the future
government of independent India to ransom, Iqbal explained, Muslims in the northwestern provinces
simply wanted to live according to their own cultural traditions without fear of Hindu domination.
Muslims were “ready to stake … all for the freedom of India” if the religious and cultural autonomy
of all communities was made “the basis of a permanent communal settlement.” Iqbal was at pains to
deny that such a Muslim state would promote religious obscurantism. Islam was not a church but a
contractual state whose citizens were spiritual beings with rights and duties in society. A Muslim state
in India would permit innovations in Islam unbridled by “Arabian imperialism.” This would not only
bring Muslims into “closer contact” with the “original spirit” of Islam but also make them more
amenable to “the spirit of modern times.”
Iqbal’s scheme ignored Muslims living in the northeast and the Hindu-majority provinces. By
contrast, Rahmat Ali’s expansive imagination envisaged a “Bangistan” or “Bang-i-Islamistan” based
on grouping Bengal and Assam. Despite the separatist overtones of his “Pakistan” scheme, he did not
fail to take account of Muslims in areas where they were in a minority. In fact, he proposed carving
out half a dozen Muslim states in India, evocatively named Osmanistan, Sadiqistan, Faruqistan,
Muinistan, Mappallistan, Safistan, and Nasiristan, from what was then British and princely India as
well as present-day Sri Lanka.  These would then be consolidated into a “Pakistan Commonwealth of
Nations” as the first step to the “original” Pakistan that was eventually to be integrated with Central
and West Asia.  It does not require much perspicacity to realize that Rahmat Ali’s “Pakistan” was the
territorial embodiment of the nonterritorially based idea of the Muslim ummah, or community. A
contradiction in terms, it represented a creative attempt to make the worldwide community of Islam
relevant at a time when the idea of territorial nationalism was rapidly coming to appeal to Muslims
living under direct or indirect Western colonial domination.
Most Indian Muslim politicians dismissed Rahmat Ali’s scheme as impracticable, a dangerous
student fantasy that was best ignored. This did not prevent the “Pakistan” idea from filtering widely
and being appropriated by urban Punjabi Muslims, some of whom mistakenly conflated it with Iqbal’s
Muslim state. However, it was not the popularity of the scheme but the campaign against it in Hinduowned newspapers in Punjab and the United Provinces (UP) that kept it within the public purview.
Non-Muslims were not alone in opposing a Muslim state in northwestern India. During the debate on
the separation of Sindh from Bombay Presidency, encompassing much of western and central India,
the provincial Muslim leader Ghulam Hussain Hidayatullah rubbished the notion in categorical terms.
For Sindhi Muslims to give up their individuality to group with their coreligionists in Punjab was
nothing short of political suicide. In 1938, the Sindh Muslim League proposed dividing India into
Muslim and non-Muslim states. The invocation of religious identity by Sindhi Muslims was an
expression of their regional aspirations rather than an affinity with coreligionists in neighboring
provinces. While sharing the Punjabi Muslim desire for strong provinces and a weak federal center,
Muslims in Sindh had no intention of accepting a subordinate position in a Muslim state. Much the
same sort of sentiment guided the policies of Abdul Ghaffar Khan, the leader of the Khudai
Khidmatgar, or Servants of God movement in the NWFP, who advocated Pathan or Pakhtun autonomy
and preferred rallying his followers under the Congress banner.

A shared religious identity was felt at the level of lived culture but rarely at the expense of the
emotive affinity with local and regional cultural traditions. Despite the narratives of communitarian
identity propagated in the press and publications market, being Muslim did not translate into a united
political front. This is borne out by the history of Indian Muslim politics under British colonial rule.
In 1909, Muslims were granted separate electorates under the Indian Councils Act known as the
Morley-Minto reforms. Although separate electorates were retained in subsequent constitutional
reforms in 1919 and 1935, the religious, regional, and class-based interests of Muslims clashed more
often than they converged. Muslim divisions were accentuated by the nature of the British Indian
political system. With the franchise restricted by educational and property qualifications, the
representative institutions of the colonial state were arenas for the privileged few to experiment with
the art of governing in their own interest. The lure of state patronage and the spoils of office were
localized. This encouraged provincial particularisms, not the all-India perspective that was supposed
to be the logical effect of Muslims being a separate political category, however dispersed
geographically and diverse linguistically. Separate electorates mitigated the need for political parties
with provincial and all-India orientations. Success in the colonial political system depended on rival
Muslim politicians, landlords in the main, manipulating local factions as they jockeyed for position
within the protected walls of specifically Muslim constituencies. So long as there was no prospect of
an executive responsible to an elected legislature at the center, the significance of Muslims being an
all-India political category was an asset of dubious value. It reduced Muslims to a permanent
constitutional minority that lacked both unity and unanimity. Only when constitutional reforms were
in the offing did Muslim politicians find the incentive to steal a glance beyond their narrow local and
provincial horizons at the all-India center and articulate the distinctive communitarian interests the
British believed existed.
A self-made middle-class lawyer from Bombay, Jinnah was a beneficiary of separate electorates in
the central assembly. But politically he was closer to the moderate constitutional wing of the Congress
represented by Gopal Krishna Gokhale and Pherozeshah Mehta than to the conservative and loyalist
landlord Muslim politicians from the northwestern provinces. Making the politics of mediation his
forte, Jinnah spent the better part of a long and distinguished political career trying to square the
interests of Muslims in the majority and the minority provinces on the one hand and the Muslim
League and the Congress on the other. His efforts to cobble together a united League and Congress
anticolonial front were, more often than not, undermined by the structural contradictions inherent in
the British Indian political system.
An early example of this was the Lucknow Pact, which Jinnah helped negotiate between the
Congress and the Muslim League in 1916. “All thinking men,” he told the Bombay Provincial
Conference at Ahmedabad in October 1916, were “thoroughly convinced that the key-note of our real
progress lies in the good-will, concord, harmony and cooperation between the two great sister
communities.” Union was “the true focus of progress” and “entirely in our hands.”  Under the terms
of the accord, Congress accepted separate electorates for Muslims in return for the Muslim League’s
help in forcing the British to make substantial concessions to Indians after the end of World War I.
With his sights set on constitutional advance at the center, Jinnah had no qualms crafting an
understanding between the two main all-India parties that entailed sacrificing the interests of Muslims
in Punjab and Bengal. Congress’s price for separate electorates and more representation for
minority-province Muslims than merited by their population was weighted representation for nonMuslim minorities in Punjab and Bengal. Punjabi Muslims, who made up about 56 percent of the
population, were given 50 percent representation. Bengali Muslims, who constituted 52.6 percent of
the population, were shortchanged with just 40 percent of the seats. By contrast, Muslims in the
minority provinces got more representation than their populations warranted. Muslims in Jinnah’s
home province of Bombay were 20 percent of the population but secured one-third of the seats in the
legislature. Muslims in the UP did best; a mere 14 percent, they were allotted 30 percent of the seats in
the provincial council.
Jinnah’s achievement was to become the source of his political vulnerability. Muslims in Punjab
and Bengal were incensed at the sellout. Hindus in the UP and Punjab, for their part, carped about
Congress’s pandering to Muslims. The Lucknow Pact was in line with the strategy of minorityprovince Muslims in the initial decades of the twentieth century to secure their own provincial
interests by pointing to Muslim majorities in the northwest and the northeast of India. But in
privileging all-India considerations over communitarian and provincial ones, Jinnah misjudged the
tenor of politics under the 1919 reforms. The colonial policy of keeping political attentions focused
on the local and provincial arenas aimed at diluting the all-India agendas of nationalist parties and
politicians. Because the Montagu-Chelmsford reforms of 1919 prevented any single community from
dominating the provincial legislatures, Muslim politicians had to forge alliances with members of
other communities to form stable governments. With the security afforded by separate electorates, the
mainly landlord politicians of the Muslim community could use their local influence to get elected
without needing the assistance of political parties at either the provincial or the all-India levels. After
1920, the Congress under Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi was able to spread its tentacles in the
Hindu-majority provinces by launching all-India mass movements. By contrast, the AIML created in
1906 remained little more than a paper organization, belittled and flouted by most Muslim provincial
politicians. In keeping with the tenor of the constitutional reforms, alliances across community lines
were forged in the UP where Muslims were in a minority and in Punjab and Bengal where they had
bare majorities.
With the provincialization of politics during the 1920s, there was no effective role left for a
Muslim party at the center. Muslims agitated about the future of the Ottoman caliphate following
Turkey’s defeat in World War I made common cause with Gandhi. The merger of the pro-Ottoman or
Khilafat agitation, as it came to be known in India, and the Gandhian-led noncooperation movements
catapulted the Mahatma onto the center stage of Indian politics, pushing the AIML a shade deeper into
oblivion. Jinnah disliked Gandhi’s brew of religion and politics even while pro-Khilafat Muslims,
such as Shaukat and Mohammad Ali, helped the Mahatma fuse Indian nationalism with Islamic
universalism. Mustapha Kamal Pasha’s abolition of the caliphate in 1924 left the Khilafatists in India
without a cause. After the collapse of the Khilafat movement and the end of the era of Hindu–Muslim
unity under Gandhi’s leadership, the Muslim League was nowhere in the picture and the Congress was
split down the middle. The British strategy of isolating the all-India parties from their provincial
bases of support had emphatically succeeded. While the Congress was able to reassemble with
relative ease, largely due to the lingering effects of the noncooperation movement, there was no all-

India Muslim political party that could plausibly speak on behalf of all Muslims.
In this period of flux and reflux, Jinnah made another attempt at patching up Muslim differences
by packaging their known demands into “fourteen points.” The main stumbling block was the need to
square the conflicting demands of Muslims in the minority and the majority provinces without
undermining his own nationalist aims at the all-India center. Following the publication of the Motilal
Nehru Report on the constitutional structure for independent India in 1928, Congress formally stated
its preference for a strong unitary center. This was abhorrent for Muslims in provinces where they
were in the majority. Jinnah’s first two points asked for a federal constitution with residuary powers
vested in fully autonomous provinces. There was to be adequate representation for minorities and a
provision preventing a majority from being reduced to a minority or a position of equality. This was
the bait Jinnah needed to restore his bona fides with Punjabi and Bengali Muslims and improve his
chances of getting one-third representation for Muslims at the center. He was opposed to separate
electorates because these would keep Muslims in a position of a statutory minority at the all-India
level. But the political scales had tipped in favor of Punjab and Bengal, where Muslim politicians
were insistent on separate electorates. So Jinnah called for their retention until Muslims voluntarily
opted for joint electorates. He tried compensating for this by demanding more Muslim-dominated
provinces—calling for the separation of Sindh from Bombay and pushing for constitutional
advancement in the NWFP and Balochistan.
The remaining points sought to assuage Muslim worries about a Hindu-dominated center. No
legislation opposed by three-fourths of the members of any particular community could be passed.
Muslims were to get an adequate share of all state services. There was to be full liberty in matters to
do with religion for all the communities, and Muslims were to be permitted to live in accordance with
their own personal laws. In what was a deliberately outlandish demand, Muslims were to have onethird representation in ministries at the center and the provinces. Finally, no constitutional change was
to be made without the concurrence of the units making up the federation. By promising Muslim
provincial politicians a lot more than he believed was achievable, Jinnah was taking out insurance for
his political future. With Muslims controlling nearly half of British India’s provinces, the leader of a
strong all-India Muslim party could try to keep a check on the majority. Congress’s refusal to
countenance these demands resulted in Jinnah abandoning Indian politics and settling down in
England, where he hoped to exert influence on the British government’s report on the future
constitutional reforms.
It was not the suave Bombay lawyer but Punjab Unionists, an alliance of Muslim, Hindu, and Sikh
agriculturist interests, who dominated the constitutional dialogue of the early 1930s. The Unionist
construct of “Muslim interest” that was eventually incorporated in the Government of India Act of
1935 was a rude shock for minority-province Muslims, accustomed as they were to riding on the
coattails of their coreligionists in the majority provinces. While advance at the center was linked to
one-half of the Indian princely states voluntarily joining the all-India federation in the future, the
provincial provisions were to come into effect immediately after the first elections under the new
reforms. Under the Communal Award of 1932 announced by the British prime minister, Muslims in
the majority provinces were allowed to retain separate electorates and were given more seats than any
other community. With the new constitutional reforms ushering in full provincial autonomy,

politicians in the Muslim-majority provinces could expect to control the ministries. Involving the
elimination of the “official bloc”—a safeguard for minority rights—provincial autonomy heightened
the insecurities of Muslims in provinces where Hindus were in the majority. The revival of the AIML
in 1934 with Jinnah at the helm was a direct result of minority-province Muslim dissatisfaction with
the new constitutional arrangements.
On January 4, 1934, the future Quaid-i-Azam stepped off the ship in Bombay in fighting spirit. He
fired the first shot at the white paper on the future constitution, calling its federal scheme “a pure
deception.” The only way to stop the British from thrusting the scheme on India was for Hindus and
Muslims to unite. The burning question was whether Indians could “even at this eleventh hour …
forget the past” and muster up the strength “to resist what is being hatched both at Downing Street and
Delhi.” They had spent far too much time thinking about their own communities, and so Jinnah
advised, “let us now concentrate upon the interests of our mother-land.”  The theme of unity was the
leitmotif of Jinnah’s political stance during the run-up to the first elections under the Government of
India Act of 1935. Projecting himself as an impartial mediator, he distanced himself from the bigoted
and self-serving elements in both communities. He wanted to lead a progressive, organized, and
united Muslim community, standing on par with other communities in the march to win India’s
freedom. Upon being elected president of the All-India Muslim League in March 1934, Jinnah
commented that it was not going to be a “bed of roses.” Muslims had to fight for safeguards without
losing sight of the “wider interests of the country as a whole,” which he had “always considered
sacred.” It was lamentable that at a most critical juncture in history, Indian Muslims were “more or
less in no man’s land. Make it your own land and allow no one to trespass. Think well before
selecting your leader and when you have selected him, follow him. But in case you find his policy
detrimental to your interests, kick him out.”  Muslims had to repudiate the conservative elements and
press the British to grant responsible government at the center, and not just in the provinces.
By the time the Government of India Act of 1935 was announced, Jinnah had far from gathered his
straying flock of coreligionists. The new law extended the electorate to nearly 35 million and granted
full autonomy to the British Indian provinces. Responsible government at the center was postponed
until one-half of the Indian states on the basis of population voluntarily acceded to the federal union.
While each of the more than 500 Indian princely states could negotiate the terms of their accession to
the Indian federation, the provinces were to automatically come into the federation. Jinnah was aware
of the Muslim provinces’ insistence on giving residual powers to the federating units. He also knew
that the Congress aimed to vest residual powers in a strong federal center. Although his own idea of
the all-India center was closer to the Congress’s, Jinnah opted to argue the Muslim brief on
constitutional grounds. Speculation is rife about the Quaid’s precise motivations in arguing the
provincialists’ case despite being a centralist himself. In fact, Jinnah had long supported the idea of an
all-India federation, calling it the best solution for India’s cultural diversities. A pragmatist, he wanted
a real federation, not one based on an artificial unity. He slammed the Act of 1935 for being
“thoroughly rotten” and “fundamentally bad.” The princes had imposed “impossible terms,” while the
“iron wall” of safeguards demanded by the British had laid a snare for unsuspecting Indians.  In the
interests of pragmatism and reason, which were his strong suits, Jinnah favored accepting the
Communal Award and working the provincial part of the act for what it was worth. This entailed
leaving the question of the all-India federation to future negotiations. As far as the Quaid-i-Azam was
concerned, India was a British paper creation with no “flesh and blood”; “a single administrative unit
governed by the bureaucracy under the sanction of the sword.”
Times had changed. By the 1930s, a mere dependence on numbers was no longer enough. Even
politicians from the Muslim-minority provinces could now see advantages in basing their demands
on the fact of Muslim-majority provinces. The right to vote remained limited to those with property
and educational qualifications, making for a vote bank of a mere 35 million in a country of over 300
million. If they could persuade their coreligionists in northwestern and northeastern India of the
merits of united political action, minority-province Muslims might be able to use the cover of their
political weight at the center to wrest advantages that were denied to them in the provincial arenas. So
Jinnah and the League now stressed that Muslims, whatever their political persuasions, should come
under the banner of a single all-India party. It was a novel claim; until then there had been no practical
need for a strong all-India Muslim party speaking on behalf of all Indian Muslims.
The claim was rejected in the 1937 elections. Even with separate electorates, the Muslim League
could poll only 4.4 percent of the total Muslim vote cast. Barring Bengal, where it won a third of the
Muslim reserved seats, Muslims snubbed the League in the majority provinces that opted for
provincial, and often nonreligious, groupings rather than for all-India parties. It did better in the
minority provinces but not well enough to force a triumphant Congress to forge coalition ministries
with the Muslim League. This locked out Jinnah and the League at the center and the provinces—and
was evidence of the success of the British strategy of alternatively communalizing and
provincializing Indian politics. Yet the provincialization of Muslim politics had not removed them as
an important political category in discussions about the future of India. Congress, too, had failed to
make an impact on the electoral scene in most of the Muslim-majority provinces. If the Congress high
command, flush with its thumping electoral victory, was now waiting to storm British India’s unitary
center, it would somehow have to rein in the Muslim provinces. Such pressure as the Congress
brought to bear on the Muslim provinces might conceivably force them to seek the League’s
mediation at the center, enabling it to bring them under its wing.
If it could emulate Congress’s example in the Hindu-majority provinces and bring the Muslimmajority provinces under its sway, the League would be able to influence the negotiations to
determine the constitutional future of independent India. Together with the apprehensions of Muslims
in the minority provinces, this gave Jinnah the basis for a strategy designed to win an equitable share
of power for Muslims at the level of all-India political arrangements. Any strategy for divided and
disorganized Muslims had to make a break with the past. What Muslims needed above all was to
overcome the limitations of being a minority. One way to resolve the dilemma was to assert that
Muslims were not a minority but a nation entitled to being treated on par with the Hindus.
There were some vague historical antecedents to the claim. In the late nineteenth century, the
educationist and social reformer Sayyid Ahmad Khan had spoken of Muslims as a qaum, a term
loosely translated as “nation” but which more accurately means a community. As he explained, by
qaum he meant the inhabitants of a country, regardless of internal diversities. Being Hindu or Muslim
was an entirely personal matter. Muslims had come to consider India as their homeland after living
cheek by jowl with Hindus for centuries: “the blood of both have changed, the colour of both have
become similar.… We mixed with each other so much that we produced a new language—Urdu,
which was neither our language nor theirs.” A year before the formation of the Congress, he
commented that “Hindus and Mussalmans are words of religious significance[;] otherwise Hindus,
Mussalmans and Christians who live in this country constitute one nation.” In his opinion, “all men
are one”; he did “not like religion, community or group to be identified with a nation.”  Despite such
clear statements, Sayyid Ahmad Khan has come to be seen as the founding father of the “two nation”
theory according to which Muslims were always a distinctive community that had resisted
assimilation into the Indian environment. This historical distortion, significantly in vogue on both
sides of the 1947 divide, flows from Sayyid Ahmad’s resolute opposition to Muslim participation in
the Congress and efforts to convince the British to treat Muslims on the basis of their political
significance rather than their numbers.
While the genealogy of the “two nation” theory is at best suspect, Jinnah’s need to invoke the idea
of Muslim distinctiveness was also based on political and not religious opposition to the Congress.
He had been incensed by Jawaharlal Nehru’s invitation to the Muslim League after the 1937 elections
to disband and join the Congress that took office in eight out of eleven British Indian provinces by
1938. Adding insult to injury, Nehru announced at the time that he had looked at the “so-called
communal question through the telescope” and found nothing.  Seeing through the Congress game
was one thing; finding a suitable antidote was quite another matter for a leader and a party whose
main constituents had repudiated them at the polls. Fortunately for Jinnah, Muslim politicians in the
majority provinces were wary of the implications of a Congress-dominated center in the future.
Unwilling to see their provincial autonomy curtailed in any way, the premiers of Punjab and Bengal
—Sikander Hayat Khan and Fazlul Huq, respectively—agreed in 1937 to accept the Muslim League
leader as their spokesman at the all-India level so long as he did not interfere in their provincial
affairs.
During the late 1930s, several imaginatively conceived Muslim proposals were floated on how
power might be shared between religiously enumerated “majorities” and “minorities” in an
independent India. In staking a claim for a share of power for Muslims on grounds of their
religiously informed identities, these schemes in their different ways challenged Congress’s right to
indivisible sovereignty. Yet they did so without altogether rejecting some kind of identification with
India. If even Iqbal’s and Rahmat Ali’s schemes did not envisage a complete break with the rest of
India, outright secession was not an option for Muslims in the minority provinces. Most of the
schemes penned by Muslims in these provinces considered themselves to be a nation-in-minority that
belonged to the larger nation inhabiting “Pakistan” and Bengal. If Muslims in the Hindu-majority
provinces were seen as belonging to a larger nation in northwestern India, religious minorities in
“Pakistan” and Bengal were expected to derive comfort from the common nationality they shared
with coreligionists dominating the non-Muslim state. But the notion of reciprocal safeguards could
work only if Muslims and non-Muslims remained part of a larger Indian whole, albeit one
dramatically reconceptualized.18

Muslim Regionalism and the All-India Muslim League
The outbreak of World War II in September 1939 provided an opportunity to test the political salience
of contending ideas about a homeland for India’s Muslims. Britain’s viceroy, Lord Linlithgow,
declared war on Germany without consulting Indian opinion and put a moratorium on all
constitutional advance. Thoroughly affronted and unable to extract an acceptable price for
cooperation in the war, Congress resigned from eight provincial governments in protest. This
offered Jinnah an opening to restore his credentials as an all-India politician. Accusing the Congress
ministries in the provinces of perpetrating atrocities against Muslims, he called on the Muslim
League to observe a “day of deliverance.” The decision of the scheduled caste leader B. R. Ambedkar
to heed the League’s call was a shot in the arm for Jinnah, already delighted at being asked to come to
the viceregal lodge on the same footing with Gandhi. Looking for a pretext to justify postponing
constitutional advance at the center for the duration of the war, the viceroy asked Jinnah for the
League’s “constructive policy.”
Any such policy had to square the conflicting interests of Muslims in the majority and the minority
provinces. Only by bringing the combined weight of the Muslim provinces to bear on discussions at
the all-India level could the League expect to have a say in the future constitutional arrangements.
Making the best of a poor hand, Jinnah made ambiguity and vagueness the better part of valor.
Needing the Muslim-majority provinces more than they needed him, he made sure that the League’s
demand offered them more provincial autonomy than they already enjoyed under the Act of 1935.
Without making any reference to a center, the Lahore resolution of March 1940 called for the
grouping of provinces in northwestern and northeastern India into “Independent States in which the
constituent units … [would be] autonomous and sovereign.” This suggested that the “Independent
States” would not just be federal in form but would have something close to a confederal structure.
Averse to such an outcome, Jinnah inserted a provision under which sovereignty of not just the
constituent units but possibly also the “Independent States” would be something for the future. The
League’s working committee was entrusted with the task of preparing a scheme that would lead to the
“assumption finally by the respective regions of all the powers such as defence, external affairs,
communications, customs and such matters as may be necessary.” Until that unspecified moment, the
regions had to support Jinnah at the center, giving him maximum room to maneuver in negotiations
with both Congress and the British.
The disjunction between his all-India vision and the regional perspectives of his Muslim
constituents continued to haunt Jinnah in the remaining years of the Raj. He tried papering over these
cracks for the duration of the war by insisting that the principle of Pakistan, the territorial
embodiment of the Muslim claim to nationhood, had to be conceded before settling the shape and
powers of the all-India center. Implicit in this line of argument was that any transfer of power to
Indians would entail the dissolution of the unitary center created by the British. Any renegotiated allIndia center—unitary, federal, or confederal—had to be based on the agreement of all the constituents
units, including the Muslim-majority provinces and the princely states. Once the British and the
Congress accepted the principle of Pakistan, Jinnah was willing to negotiate its future relationship
with the rest of India. This could be in the nature of a confederation between the predominantly
Muslim and Hindu areas or based on treaty arrangements on matters of common interest between two

essentially sovereign states—Pakistan (representing the Muslim-majority provinces) and Hindustan
(representing the Hindu-majority provinces).
In either case, Jinnah wanted something close to parity with the Congress at the all-India level
because Muslims as a nation had a right to an equal share of power with the Hindus. If it was to cover
the interests of Muslims in both the majority and the minority provinces, “Pakistan” had to remain
part of an all-India whole. In keeping with that aim, Jinnah made it a point to always speak of Pakistan
and Hindustan and not Pakistan and India. “We are not enemies of the Congress,” he told a group of
Punjabi Muslim and Hindu students in August 1944, though we disagree on certain issues. “If we must
have a separate State,” he continued, “that will not mean we shall have nothing to do with each other.”
He had no doubt that “both Hindus and Muslims will be happy when Pakistan is established” as it was
in their best interest. They would never “allow anybody, whether he is Afghan or Pathan, to dominate
us” because “India is for Indians.” It would be “foolish of the Hindus, and vice versa,” not to come to
the defense of Pakistan if it were invaded by any outside power.
Such a vision was at odds with the humdrum of everyday politics. Leading a party whose main
bases of support were in the Muslim-minority provinces rather than in the provinces demanded for
Pakistan, Jinnah, the constitutionalist, with an eye on the all-India stage, was on the horns of a
dilemma. Much has been made of the transformation of this secular and Westernized lawyer after
1940. Yet Jinnah’s recourse to Islam was a product of political necessity—the need to win the support
of a community that was a distinctive category in official and popular parlance but with no prior
history of organizing on a single platform. He could not dilate on his real political objectives because
what could rouse Muslims in the minority provinces would put off Muslims where they were in a
majority. A populist program to mobilize the Muslim rural masses was out of the question. It would
infuriate the landed men who called the shots in provincial politics. This is where recourse to Islam
made sense to a politician and a party with neither a populist past nor a populist present. Both
politician and party needed to steal the populist march on their rivals.
It was his manipulation not of religion but of politics that enabled Jinnah to steer the course for the
League. By scrutinizing every word of the Lahore resolution, he managed to create a semblance of
support for the Muslim League by raising the expectations of majority-province politicians.
“Pakistan” for them was security not just against a Congress-dominated center but much more. It
epitomized their aspirations for regional self-determination even if cast in the mold of religious
communitarianism. What was good for Muslims as an all-India community was not always perceived
to be in the best interest of Muslims in the regions. So if tensions between central and regional
imperatives threatened to undermine Jinnah and the Muslim League’s cause, the delicate balance
between Muslim communitarian and Muslim regional interests was an even bigger source for
concern.
This was exemplified by Punjab and Bengal, two provinces whose undivided territories and nonMuslim populations the League claimed for Pakistan. The only way to realistically make a bid for the
incorporation of these provinces into Pakistan was by promising equal rights of citizenship and other
safeguards for non-Muslims living in them. But diluting the Muslim slant of the League’s demand and
entertaining regionally specific matters ran the risk of eroding its appeal for minority-province
Muslims. Looking for the broadest level of Muslim support with which to stop the Congress’s march
to power at the center, Jinnah was unwilling to be drawn into the knotty details of safeguards for nonMuslim minorities in Muslim provinces until the all-India picture had been clarified. Yet continued
Muslim domination of undivided Punjab and Bengal was contingent on keeping political equations
with the non-Muslims in good order. In choosing to wait for Congress and the British to concede the
League’s demands at the center before negotiating with non-Muslims in these two provinces, Jinnah
laid the basis for a deadly contradiction. It proved to be the undoing of his strategy to deploy the
demand for a Pakistan to cover the interests of all Indian Muslims, not only in the majority provinces
but also in provinces where they were in a minority.
The contradiction was apparent to the more perceptive analysts. A claim to the whole of Punjab
and Bengal based on Muslim self-determination could not be upheld if it meant denying that right to
the non-Muslims of these provinces. The first person to raise this was Stafford Cripps, the British
Labor Party leader, who came to India as London’s emissary in the spring of 1942. With Japan
knocking on India’s doors after its sweep through Southeast Asia in early 1942, the American
president Franklin Roosevelt and the Chinese leader Chiang Kai-shek prevailed on the British prime
minister Winston Churchill to make one more attempt to get Congress to cooperate in the war effort.
The Cripps Mission made no headway on its short-term objective of securing Congress participation
in the viceroy’s executive council. However, its long-term plans for independent India put the finger
on the principal contradiction in the League’s demand. The Congress’s contention that Indian freedom
ought not to be delayed in the absence of Hindu–Muslim unity was conceded. Congress could have the
strong center it wanted so long as it recognized the right of the provinces to opt out of the Indian
union and achieve independent dominion status.
The less insightful interpreted the Cripps local option of granting provinces the right to remain
independent as meeting the demand for a “Pakistan.” But the concession to opt out of the Indian union
was made to provinces and not communities. With bare majorities, Muslim politicians in Punjab and
Bengal could expect to exercise the right successfully only by coming to terms with the non-Muslims.
Better placed to use the local option to seek independent dominion status within the British empire,
politicians in Sindh and the NWFP were now even less likely than before to pay heed to Jinnah and the
League at the center. All this would leave Muslims in the minority provinces to their own devices,
precisely what the vague but specifically Muslim demand for a “Pakistan” was calculated to prevent.
The failure of the Cripps Mission spared the Muslim League from the embarrassment of seeing its
main constituents abandon all-India purposes for their own regionally construed concerns.
In 1944, the old Congress hand from Madras, C. R. Rajagopalachari, picked up where Cripps had
left off by proposing a “Pakistan” consisting of the Muslim-majority districts of Punjab and Bengal.
The “Pakistan” on offer would have to still share defense, communications, and commerce with the
rest of India. Jinnah, too, envisaged some sort of common arrangements with Hindustan. But these
had to be based on parity with the Congress, not abject dependency. So even though the territorial
dimensions of Pakistan in 1947 closely approximated those conceived by Rajagopalachari, Jinnah
trashed them as “offering a shadow and a husk—a maimed, mutilated and moth-eaten Pakistan” and
pretending to have “met our Pakistan scheme and Muslim demand.”
Brushing aside Congress’s moves was easier than keeping a handle on his wayward Muslim
constituents. Jinnah’s insistence on being the sole spokesman of India’s Muslims was intended to keep
a modicum of discipline in his camp. It was a losing proposition. The balance of power now lay with
the provinces and not their all-India spokesman. Unable to alter political realities in the Muslim
provinces, Jinnah had to rest content with the appearance rather than the substance of support in the
formal arenas of politics. His uneasy alliance with the Unionists in Punjab was bitterly opposed by
Muslim Leaguers who wanted the party to be on a stronger organizational footing in the province. In
Bengal, Sindh, and the NWFP, Jinnah preferred to see the League shunting in and out of office rather
than focus on the more difficult task of building the party organization. Given the disconnect between
the League’s party machinery and popular sentiments for “Pakistan,” which did come to appeal to
Muslims in majority and minority provinces during the remaining years of the war, Jinnah avoided
tackling issues that might expose the fragility of his support base in the Muslim provinces. There was
a contradiction between the Muslim claim for undivided Punjab and Bengal and the need to reassure
their non-Muslim minorities that their rights would be adequately safeguarded. All he could do was to
invoke the principle of reciprocity in the Lahore resolution and assert that minorities would be
protected in “Pakistan” and the same treatment expected for Muslims in the Hindu-majority provinces.
The League’s organizational weaknesses in the provinces demanded for a “Pakistan” meant that
Jinnah could not risk losing the backing of Muslims in the minority provinces. At various stages in
the movement for “Pakistan,” he reminded the League of the sacrifices of minority-province Muslims
that could never be forgotten. He also urged Muslims in the Hindu provinces to show magnanimity
and not hinder the struggle for emancipation and freedom being fought by their coreligionists in the
majority provinces. When the time came to strike the right bargain with Congress and the British,
“Pakistan” was the “surest guarantee for the fair treatment of the minorities.”  Leaguers in the
Muslim-minority provinces took comfort in the assurance and, like their counterparts in the majority
provinces, interpreted “Pakistan” as consistent with a confederation with Hindustan. The British
reforms commissioner H. V. Hodson confirmed that “Pakistan” was effectively a revolt against
minority status and that, far from aiming to divide India, it was a bid for a share of power in an
independent India.
If a Muslim state carved out of the northwest and the northeast was not inconsistent with a
confederal arrangement covering the whole of the subcontinent, why was India partitioned in 1947? A
plausible answer to this question requires shedding the presumption of a linear progression from the
assertion of nationhood to the achievement of statehood. After 1940 there was no retracting of the
League claim that Indian Muslims were a nation entitled to equal treatment with Hindus in all future
constitutional negotiations. However, the demand for a separate sovereign state was kept open for
negotiation as late as the summer of 1946. The real dilemma facing Jinnah and the League was how to
cover the interests of all Muslims in the absence of a neat equation between populations and territory.
There were nearly as many Muslims living in the rest of India as those residing in provinces claimed
for Pakistan. With the Muslim nation straddling both “Pakistan” and “Hindustan,” their boundaries
had to be permeable. This was the primary reason for Jinnah’s and the League’s stubborn insistence
on getting undivided Punjab and Bengal for Pakistan without reassuring non-Muslim minorities of
their citizenship rights. The reasons for the ambivalences in the Lahore resolution can be
comprehended only by underscoring the difference between a purely separatist demand and one
angling for an equitable power-sharing arrangement at the subcontinental level between two
disproportionate nations. Looking to challenge Congress’s bid for power at the center based on the
notion of monolithic sovereignty introduced by the British, Jinnah and the League came forward with
a scheme that drew on the idea of shared sovereignty. Such a conception of sovereignty was in line
with the subcontinent’s long history of creative power-sharing arrangements among its diverse
peoples and regions. Distinguishing between a “nation” and “state” and a partition of India as opposed
to a partition of the two main Muslim-majority provinces helps to unravel the contradictory dynamics
underpinning the demand for a “Pakistan.”
Jinnah avoided discussing the more awkward aspects of the League’s scheme while the war lasted.
Once it was over, his tactics presented the biggest impediment to the British negotiating a deal with
the Congress at the center. Before the 1945–46 elections, the governors of Punjab, Bengal, and Assam
advised New Delhi and London to assure the non-Muslims of their provinces that they would not be
bundled into a predominantly Muslim state against their will. But no authoritative statement was made
prior to the elections. Jinnah took a rickety League into the elections on the vague but emotive slogan
of “Pakistan” whose precise territories were as hazy as its ideological orientation was bitterly
contested. Pro-Congress ulema represented by organizations like the Jamiat-ul-Ulema-i-Hind and the
Majlis-i-Ahrar advocated a composite Indian nationalism in one breath and sharia-based personal
laws for Muslims in the next. The paradox of this nonsecular vision being perfectly compatible with
Congress’s inclusionary nationalism is yet another example of the many possible combinations of
religious and secular politics in India. No less paradoxical was the support for a “Pakistan” by
Muslims who were ideologically of either the communist or the socialist ilk. The participation of
such ungodly people in the campaign for “Pakistan” lent starch to the claim of pro-Congress ulema
that the League was a “secular” charade and that Jinnah was not the Quaid-i-Azam or the great leader,
as his followers called him, but the Kafir-i-Azam or the preeminent leader of the infidels. In this
highly charged atmosphere, Muslims for and against the League used Islamic rhetoric to take down
one another. Some of the attacks were patently offensive, embittering not only intra- but also
intercommunitarian relations in the Muslim-majority provinces. The implications of the religious
overtones of the electoral propaganda for the fragile communitarian balance of Punjab and Bengal
were detrimental for Jinnah’s purposes at the center.
These concerns were offset by the dramatic reversal of fortunes for the Muslim League. Stunned
by voter apathy in 1937, the League found itself crowned with spectacular success in the 1945–46
elections. It not only made a clean sweep of the Muslim seats to the central assembly but also polled
75 percent of the Muslim vote cast in the provincial assembly elections. Jinnah predictably hailed the
election results as an endorsement of the League’s claim for parity with the Congress at the center and
a “Pakistan” consisting of the two main Muslim-majority provinces. But the Muslim electorate in
Punjab and Bengal were not told that voting for “Pakistan” could mean a partition of their domains on
the basis of religious self-determination. This would have strained the League’s hastily concluded
alliances with many local politicians in Punjab and Bengal who were under the misconception that a
vote for “Pakistan” would guarantee their dominance over these undivided provinces.
As it was, the Muslim League’s electoral success did not translate easily into solid gains at the
governmental level. Though it emerged as the largest single bloc in the Punjab assembly, the political
arithmetic prevented the League from forming a ministry on its own. Neither the numerically

depleted Unionists nor the Sikhs and the Congress were prepared to help the Punjab Muslim League
take office. The governor called on the Unionist premier Khizar Hayat Tiwana to once again form the
government, which he did with the help of the Panthic Sikhs and the Congress. Being kept out of
office in a province Jinnah had called the cornerstone of “Pakistan” was not the only insult the League
suffered so soon after its electrifying success. While managing to slot in a shaky ministry in Sindh,
the Muslim League had to face the ignominy of seeing a Congress government take office in the
Pathan heartland of the NWFP. Bengal was the only province where there was a Muslim League
ministry but one that saw provincial advantages in keeping open the possibility of a coalition
government with the Congress. So even with the groundswell of Muslim support for “Pakistan,” a
risky course awaited Jinnah before he could secure parity with the Congress at the center. Needing the
Muslim provinces to take a seat at the negotiating table with Congress and the British, Jinnah had
chosen not to rock the boat by enforcing too strict a disciplinary regime on their mainly landlord
politicians. Although helping him gain a toehold in these provinces in the short term, this strategy was
to narrow his options considerably when the time came for the final negotiations. Fissiparous
tendencies and intense rivalries within the Muslim camp gave Congress’s high command ample
opportunities to erect roadblocks to further progress. With the NWFP already in the Congress’s
pocket, there was nothing to prevent it from striking deals with politicians in the Muslim-majority
provinces. And it could do so with crushing effect now that the British, with an eye to the endgame,
were no longer willing to smile on Jinnah’s tactics. But having puffed up the League leader for their
wartime objectives, neither New Delhi nor London could afford to wholly ignore his “Pakistan”
demand.
In the spring of 1946, the Labor government decided to send out a cabinet delegation to determine
how power was to be transferred in India. After meetings with a cross-section of Indian leaders and
opinion makers, the Cabinet Mission proposed a three-tier federal constitutional framework that came
close to giving Jinnah what he both wanted and needed. There was to be compulsory grouping of
provinces at the second tier and an all-India federal center confined only to defense, foreign affairs,
and communications. The grouping of provinces gave the League a virtual center, which it could use
to control the Muslim provinces prior to bringing their weight to bear at the all-India level. This was
all the more important because the mission’s plan did not guarantee the Muslim provinces parity with
the Congress provinces at the center. The alternative to this arrangement was a sovereign “Pakistan”
minus the Hindu-majority districts of eastern Punjab and western Bengal, including Calcutta.
On June 6, 1946, Jinnah sprung a surprise on his followers and detractors alike when he persuaded
a closed session of the AIML council to reject a sovereign “Pakistan” and accept the Cabinet
Mission’s proposal for a federated India. He won the day by arguing that the struggle for a “Pakistan”
would continue even after the Muslim provinces joined the union. All residuary powers of the
federation except for three subjects would be vested at the group level. The grouping of Muslim
political power would allow the League to press its case in a federal constituent assembly. If worse
came to worst, the Muslim provinces could opt out of the union within a ten-year period. This was the
second time in two years that Jinnah had turned down the offer of a “Pakistan” based on a partition of
Punjab and Bengal. But Congress had no intention of honoring grouping of provinces, which Gandhi
thought was much worse than partition. Nehru, for his part, was strongly opposed to a weak federal

center and saw no justification for grouping. Upon taking over as Congress president from Maulana
Abul Kalam Azad, Nehru declared on July 11, 1946, that provincial grouping might not last,
effectively negating Congress’s acceptance of the Cabinet Mission’s plan. As far as Nehru was
concerned, real authority had to vest in the federal center and not the group legislatures as the League
had demanded.
Grouping of provinces for Jinnah was the crux of the matter. Indication that Congress intended to
break grouping by exploiting Muslim divisions persuaded him that the mission’s plan was not a
secure basis for a settlement. A sovereign “Pakistan” alone could give the League a center to prevent
Muslim politicians from crossing the floor and joining the Congress if the political weather vane so
demanded. But a sovereign “Pakistan” had to include undivided Punjab and Bengal if it was to
negotiate safeguards for Muslims in Hindustan or secure a substantial share of the all-India center’s
assets, including the army. Jinnah was riled at not being asked to form the interim government despite
the League satisfying the condition of accepting the mission’s long-term proposals. Suspicious of the
Congress and unsure about British impartiality, he not only advised the League to revert to its
original demand of March 1940 but, in a move that was uncharacteristic of his political style,
sanctioned a “direct action” movement to achieve “Pakistan” through unconstitutional means if
necessary. Jinnah’s willingness to adopt agitational methods was not a call to violence. Despite his
calm counsels for peace and quiet introspection, direct action day on August 16, 1947, turned
Calcutta, the capital of a province where a League ministry was in power, into a city of the dead. For
five days the manipulators of Calcutta’s underworld and bands of thugs, both Hindu and Muslim,
carried out horrific acts of cold-blooded murder, arson, and pillage, leaving about 4000 dead and
15,000 wounded.
There was a general outcry against Jinnah and the Muslim League. Pressed by London to make a
conciliatory gesture and prevent further outbreaks of violence, the viceroy Lord Wavell invited the
Congress to form the interim government despite its reservations about the grouping clause. Seeing
the world collapse around him, Jinnah promptly instructed the League to take its place in the interim
government alongside the Congress on terms that he had previously refused to countenance. Worse
shocks were on the way. On February 20, 1947, the British prime minister Clement Attlee announced
that power would be transferred by June 1948 and virtually accepted that the Cabinet Mission’s plan
was a dead letter. But instead of mentioning “Pakistan,” London revived the Cripps offer by stating its
willingness to transfer power to existing provincial governments if no agreement was possible at the
center. Several Muslim politicians in Sindh and the NWFP interpreted Attlee’s statement as a
precursor to their independence. Privileging Muslim provincialism rather than Muslim
communitarianism was tantamount to pulling the rug from under Jinnah’s feet. What was more, by
setting a deadline for the termination of their rule, the British had paved the way for a deal with the
Congress that could secure their long-term economic and strategic interests in South Asia.
Jinnah continued hoping that the British would not divide Punjab and Bengal. Even before the last
viceroy, Lord Mountbatten, arrived in India, Congress had taken the first step to cut the Pakistan
demand down to size. On March 8, 1947, the Congress led by Nehru formally called for the partition
of Punjab and indicated that a similar fate may await Bengal. This proved to be a fait accompli for the
new viceroy, eager to strike a common chord with the Congress in order to create the conditions for

Britain’s honorable exit while keeping India in the British Commonwealth. Brushing aside Jinnah’s
arguments that it was a grave error to equate the principle of “Pakistan” with the partition of Punjab
and Bengal, Mountbatten accused Jinnah of megalomania bordering on lunacy. Once Congress had
stated its price for agreeing to dominion status and staying in the Commonwealth—an early eviction
of the League from the interim government and a final settlement based on the creation of a
“Pakistan” shorn of eastern Punjab and western Bengal—the viceroy advanced the date for the
transfer of power to August 1947. Congress’s change of heart required abandoning two of its oldest
and most sacred principles—the unity of India and full independence. But the advantages of the
compromise far outweighed the disadvantages. By accepting dominion status and inviting
Mountbatten to remain as governor-general, Congress got around the difficulty posed by the lapse of
British paramountcy over the Indian princely states, which occupied nearly 40 percent of India’s
territory. Moreover, by cutting its losses and effectively demanding partition, Congress could rid
itself of Jinnah and the League and settle down to ruling three-fourths of India according to its
unfettered will.
In the end, instead of an equitable power-sharing arrangement between the Muslim provinces and
Hindustan, Jinnah was offered an unenviable choice—an undivided India with no assurance of the
Muslim share of power at the center or a sovereign “Pakistan” devoid of the non-Muslim-majority
districts of Punjab and Bengal. While his preoccupations with the all-India arrangements had sunk the
prospect of a power-sharing arrangement that might have saved Punjab from being rent in twain,
there were some prospects of Bengal remaining united. Bengal without Calcutta, Jinnah quipped, was
like asking a man to live without his heart. He sanctioned efforts to keep Bengal united and
independent, noting that it would be on good relations with “Pakistan.” Toward that end, he demanded
a corridor linking the two independent Muslim-majority states. The Congress high command nipped
the plan for a united and independent Bengal in the bud. If he had been confident of keeping his
straying flock of supporters together inside the all-India constituent assembly, Jinnah might
conceivably have tried giving the Cabinet Mission’s plan a trial run. This could have prevented the
division of the two main Muslim-majority provinces and allowed him to use their political weight,
not to mention that of the non-Muslim minorities, to negotiate safeguards for all Indian Muslims.
The fundamental structural contradiction in the British Indian political system between all-India
concerns and regional dynamics ultimately defeated Jinnah. Against the backdrop of mounting
tensions along lines of religious community and brutal acts of violence in different parts of India,
which his detractors unfairly blamed on him, he was in no position to extract any concessions from
the Congress. Bluntly told by the viceroy that his recalcitrance could lose him the Pakistan that was on
offer, Jinnah reluctantly acquiesced in Mountbatten’s plan for a partition involving an agonizing
dismemberment of Punjab and Bengal. Partition as it came about did not entail the division of India
into two “successor” states, Pakistan and Hindustan. Congress inherited British India’s unitary center.
Pakistan consisted of the Muslim-majority provinces shorn of eastern Punjab and western Bengal
(including Calcutta)—the “mutilated and moth-eaten” state that Jinnah had rejected in 1944 and again
in 1946. A Pakistan without its non-Muslim minorities in Punjab and Bengal was in no position to
negotiate safeguards for Muslims in the rest of India. Congress insisted on partition as a final
settlement, arguing that the Muslim areas were to be seen as “contracting out” of the “Union of India.”

This put an end to the Indian Muslim “nation” using the grant of independent statehood to its
collective advantage. Moreover, if “Pakistan” collapsed under the weight of its own contradictions, its
constituent units would have to return to the Indian union singly, not re-create it on the basis of two
sovereign states. Jinnah’s decision to become the governor-general of the new state was intended to
forestall such a development. But with millions dislocated as a result of partition and the killings of
hundreds of thousands of innocent men, women, and children that followed in its wake, the prospects
of Pakistan surviving the trauma of its bloodstained birth looked extremely bleak. Cast against its will
into the role of the “seceding” state, and with Muslim provincialism rather than the presumed unities
of a common religion providing a major driving force for its creation, Pakistan’s first priority was
to create a viable central authority over two geographically separated territories that until then had
been governed from New Delhi.


Chapter 2: TRUNCATED STATE, DIVIDED NATION
RELIGION IS OFTEN THOUGHT to have been the main impetus behind the creation of Pakistan. The
historical evidence militates against such certitude. The demand for Pakistan was intended to get an
equitable, if not equal, share of power for Indian Muslims in an independent India. What instead
emerged, to use the words of the founder of Pakistan, was a “truncated … moth-eaten and mutilated
state.” If their claim to nationhood had been conceded, Muslims as a “nation” were divided into two
mutually hostile states. Religion as political identity did play a part in the outcome but not, as is
believed, by conceding the right of self-determination to Muslims qua Muslims. In keeping with the
Cripps offer of 1942, the right to opt out of the Indian union was given to provinces, not to
communities.
Since the principle of self-determination was extended on a territorial basis, Congress opted to cut
its losses by letting areas with a Muslim preponderance split off from the Indian union. According to
the terms set by Mountbatten for ratifying partition, a minority vote of non-Muslim legislators
prevailed over the majority opinion of Muslim legislators of Punjab and Bengal to keep their
provinces undivided. If partition ended up stripping Muslims of their dominance in undivided Punjab
and Bengal, it sundered the Muslim nation on whose behalf the AIML had raised the demand for a
Pakistan. These paradoxical results of the recourse to religion as the basis of politics are inexplicable
without accounting for the crucial interplay between politics in the regions and the center in late
colonial India.
Once Pakistan came into being, the place of religion in state ideology was a question that had to be
faced squarely in this Muslim homeland. A divided nation with a truncated state had to ponder the
rights of minorities that remained in its midst even after the great exodus of 1947. Even more
challenging was the task of reconciling different interpretations of Islam as well as the regional,
cultural, and linguistic diversities that underlay the shared bond of Islam. A vibrant debate on the
tenor of the relationship between Islam and the state played itself out in the constituent assembly as
well as the more informal arenas of political discourse during the first decade of postindependence
Pakistan.

Imperfect Dawn
A singular emphasis on religion obscures the drama of human emotions as communities turning into
nations crossed the threshold from colonial subjection to freedom amid rivers of blood. In the
famous words of the Urdu poet Faiz Ahmad Faiz, this was not the dawn for which he and his
comrades had set out seeking refuge for their troubled hearts. The atmosphere may have been festive
and the leaders might claim to have reached the goal, but their calming words were no cure for the
pain of severance. Yet the poet’s hope for an alternative dawn had not died. His mind and spirit were
still free: “Let us go on, our goal is not reached yet.”
Hope was poor recompense for those who lost dear ones and saw their properties and livelihoods
destroyed. Stories of individual trauma caused by divided families, disrupted friendships, and lost
spatial moorings are among the most popular genres of writings on partition. Carrying the
cumulative burdens of partition individually and collectively, these personal remembrances are
invariably colored by subsequent developments and have to be read in the context of when they were
written. Most partition narratives frame the violence in communitarian terms even when they invoke
the spirit of humanism. Yet the agonizing pain of dislocation and the loss of loved ones were not
always easy to explain in terms of religion, particularly for those who considered religion as a matter
of personal faith based on inner spirituality and human ethics. The worst violence in 1947 occurred in
rural Punjab. Unprecedented in scale, it was also qualitatively different from incidents of Hindu–
Muslim conflict that had taken place in earlier decades, mostly in towns. Banded individuals, often
drawn from the ranks of demobilized soldiers, targeted erstwhile neighbors belonging to another
religious community. Yet rather than religion per se, the fight was over zar (wealth), zameen (land),
and zan (women) highly prized by Punjab’s patriarchal agrarian society. The trauma of separating at
close quarters left psychological wounds that would take decades to heal.
The Urdu short story writer Saadat Hasan Manto, who lived through the cataclysmic events of
1947, has left a riveting account of the psychodrama of partition as it played out in the lives of
ordinary people. A witness to the troubled times, Manto kept his ears close to the ground, making his
literary corpus a treasure trove for historians looking for insights into the human dimension of
partition. What he saw of the batwara, the vernacular term he used to refer to partition, convinced him
that it was not religious zealotry or piety but human greed and man’s astonishing capacity for
bestiality that had brought the subcontinent to such a sorry pass. A social renegade who mostly wrote
on ethically challenging issues through a probing exploration of human psychology, Manto was a
humanist who could not suffer bigots. In his irreverent self-epitaph, Manto wondered whether he was
a greater short-story writer than God. In story after story, he captures the snapping of old bonds of
friendship and the melting away of love and shared cultures in a milieu infected with the rhetoric of
“Muslim” and “Hindu” animosity. He left the politics of the murderous frenzy that soaked the
subcontinent in blood at the moment of the British withdrawal to latter-day historians. His forte lay in
cutting through the communitarian morass of the period to lay bare the ugly but still strangely
hopeful glimpses of human nature as ordinary individuals reacted to the rupture of partitioned lands
and lives.
Based in Bombay at the time of partition, Manto wove together the personal and the impersonal in
ways that elude historians. His partition short stories lift the veil over the human misery caused by the
arbitrary drawing of boundaries that the bravado of national independence casts into the shade.  In
“Toba Tek Singh,” Manto questions the sanity of those who partitioned India by spotlighting lunatics
in a mental asylum in Lahore after the two states had decided to exchange all inmates on the basis of
religion. One inmate becomes so overwrought that he climbs up a tree and, after a two-hour-long
soliloquy on the politics of partition, announces his wish to live in the tree. Upon finding out that his
beloved hometown, Toba Tek Singh, is in Pakistan, a Sikh inmate refuses to be transferred to India
and dies standing in no-man’s-land.
If place affiliations could be stronger than the bonds of religion, the temptation to take advantage
of the weak and the vulnerable, regardless of community, was amply in evidence. In “Khul Do,”
(Open It) a distraught Muslim father desperately looking for his kidnapped daughter eventually finds
her, only to discover that the young Muslim men who had helped him locate her had also raped the
girl. The story punctures the facile attribution of religious motives to the violence unleashed on
members of other communities. So does the poignant yarn “Parhiya Kalima” (Recite the Muslim
Confessional), which underlines why all the killings at the time of partition cannot be ascribed to
religious zeal. Caught by the police holding the knife he used to kill his former mistress’s Hindu
lover, the murderer speaking as a true believer confesses his crime. It was a crime of passion, he
insists, and not one motivated by Pakistan. It was Manto’s bone-chilling story “Thanda Gosht” (Cold
Meat), however, that so rattled the sensibilities of the Pakistani authorities that they booked him on
charges of obscenity. The story is about a Sikh who carries off a young Muslim girl after killing six
of her family members. When he reaches the canal near the train tracks, he places the girl under some
bushes and forces himself on her, only to discover that she had been dead all along.
In writing such graphic descriptions of the atrocities perpetrated in the name of religion and
nation, Manto does not pass moral judgments on the actions of the murderers. Accepting the
gruesome reality of partition at face value, he sought to find rare pearls of humanity in the man-made
sea of blood, a hint of remorse felt deeply or a reflection of tears shed by murderers. Manto wanted
to blow the whistle on the fraudulent self-righteousness of those around him. There were
unforgettable scenes. “Muslims were very happy because they had got Pakistan. Where was Pakistan?
What was it? They had no idea. But they were happy because after a long time they had a reason to be
happy.” The gangsters of Rampur were carousing, smoking cigarettes, and chewing on betel leaves.
After days of bloodletting, there was remarkably no violence on August 14, 1947, in Bombay. People
were busy celebrating the winning of freedom. “Nobody was thinking about freedom, how it was
achieved and what changes it would bring in their lives.” There were slogans of “Pakistan Zindabad”
(Long live Pakistan) on one side and ‘Hindustan Zindabad’ (Long live Hindustan) on the other.”  The
obverse of these celebratory catchphrases was a barrage of denunciatory ones, most popular of which
was “Pakistan Murdabad” and “Hindustan Murdabad”—death to Pakistan and Hindustan. These
provided cover for all manner of human outrages, including dousing people with petrol and setting
them alight.
The dizzying range of challenges that came with freedom turned the question of Pakistan’s
survival into a national preoccupation. There was endless chatter about sinister Hindu and British
plots to nip the incipient state in the bud. The old and new inhabitants wondered whether Pakistan
would reunite with India. There was also the possibility of the whole subcontinent becoming Pakistan
or vanishing along with India from the map of the world one day.  Amid the haze of uncertainty
surrounding the future location of places, establishing ownership of space was an immediate priority.
The exodus of non-Muslims from the western parts of Punjab generated a boom in real estate. For all
its manifold woes, Pakistan ended up with twice as many evacuee properties than Muslim migrants
abandoned in India, creating a deep vested interest in the acquisition of evacuee properties by those
with political connections. The distractions of property allotments dulled enthusiasm for the boons of
freedom among those left to watch the spectacle from the sidelines. It was only a matter of time
before the venality and matching inefficiencies of the politicians became a pretext for the derailment
of the political process by the army projecting itself as the sole guarantor of Pakistan’s survival.
Amid general confusion and misunderstanding about the rationale for its creation, the catchphrase
“Pakistan Zindabad” gave solace to agitated minds and served as an ultimate badge of legitimacy in
the land of the pure. As the first slogan of patriotism, it was readily adopted by the citizenry but was
soon accompanied by more ideologically driven slogans, like “What is the meaning of Pakistan? La
ilaha ilallah—there is no God but God.” Slogans are significant not only in what they reveal about
the psyche of a people but also in all that they disguise. The simple statement “long live Pakistan”
celebrated the ideal of a homeland where Muslims expected to realize their aspirations and live
according to their own cultural mores. For the mainly Urdu-speaking migrants from India who
abandoned home and hearth to make their futures in a predominantly non-Urdu speaking country,
Pakistan was the land of opportunity. Better educated than most of their coreligionists in western
Pakistan, they expected to get the best jobs. Some of these muhajirs, as the refugees from India came
to be known, had sensibly moved their money before partition in the hope of starting up new
businesses in both wings of the country. The idea of material gain encapsulated in “Pakistan
Zindabad” was a stretch removed from the other more loaded slogan, defining its meaning in vague
Islamic terms. But for all their claims dressed up in religious terminology, the protagonists of an
Islamic state too had their sights on power and pelf in the Muslim El Dorado. Although no one denied
the Muslim character of Pakistan, there was a vast difference between those who interpreted it as, first
and foremost, a land of opportunity and others who saw it as the perfect laboratory for their versions
of Islam.
The Westernized urban classes had a universal disdain for mullahs and the “mullahcracy.” Living
in their newly acquired posh bungalows and enjoying membership privileges in clubs previously the
exclusive preserve of the British, these English-educated classes ridiculed obscurantist mullahs and
flaunted their modernity. Ballroom dancing was a rage among the social elite and cocktail parties a
common practice. Using inherited or adopted Urdu cultural idioms and practices in their everyday
lives, these pioneers of a postcolonial Pakistani modernity aimed at creating a secular national ethos.
But in equating class privileges with modernity, they neglected to account for the woes of the
underprivileged, reduced to living in low-cost housing or shantytowns, those for whom the land of
opportunity had proven to be a barren wasteland of dreams. With widening social and economic
disparities along class and regional lines, the cry of religion held out attractions for the urban poor
only insofar as it offered a miraculous escape from the wretchedness of daily existence. Resentful of
the rich and powerful, the subordinate social strata were not necessarily enamored of the Islam
propagated by mullahs whom many associated with platefuls of halwa (sweetmeats) and a pocket full
of alms. But there were a handful of Western-educated Muslim advocates of an Islamic state in the
administrative bureaucracy and the newspaper industry who saw advantages in promoting a religious
ideology among the masses.
So long as Jinnah and Liaquat Ali Khan remained at the helm, the ideologues of an Islamic state in
Pakistan had to rest content with symbolic gestures. As a politician who knew the importance of
playing to the gallery, Jinnah made references to Islam that were compatible with his secular and
democratic vision of a Pakistan with opportunities for all, regardless of caste, community, or creed.
In one of the more memorable contemporary recollections of Mohammad Ali Jinnah on the eve of
partition, Beverley Nichols described the lanky and stylishly dressed barrister as the “most important
man in Asia.” Looking every bit like a gentleman of Spain, of the old diplomatic school, the
monocle-wearing leader of the AIML held a pivotal place in the future of India. “If Gandhi goes, there
is always Nehru, or Rajagopalachari, or Patel or a dozen others. But if Jinnah goes, who is there?”
Without Jinnah to steer the course, the Muslim League was a potentially explosive force that “might
run completely off the rails, and charge through India with fire and slaughter”; it might even “start
another war.” As long as Jinnah was around, nothing disastrous was likely to happen and so, Nichols
quipped, “a great deal hangs on the grey silk cord of that monocle.”
The state that this monocle-wearing leader got was very different from the one he had sought. A
string of thorny issues have dogged representations of Pakistani history ever since its appearance on
the global scene as a homeland for Indian Muslims. An anomaly among modern nation-states,
Pakistan as it emerged in 1947 was separated by a thousand miles of Indian territory into a western
and an eastern wing that had nothing in common except the bond of Islam. In the western wing,
linguistic and cultural differences were partially offset by geographical contiguity and a mutual
dependence on the Indus. The association between its two far-flung wings, however, was more a
product of historical contingency than of genuine empathy. The need to use the past for purposes of
national integration was felt at the very outset, but the methods used to represent history had
consequences that were to prove inimical for the unity of the country.
The immediate challenge was to establish Pakistan’s distinctiveness in the community of nations.
This was complicated by India’s inheritance of British India’s international personality, which
effectively cast Pakistan into the role of a seceding state. As the founding father of Pakistan, Jinnah
had foreseen the problem and strongly objected to the Hindu-majority areas being allowed to use the
designation “India” after the Muslim-majority areas had formed a separate state of Pakistan. But even
he had to make a virtue out of necessity. As he put it poignantly a few months after partition:
A vigorous propaganda has been going on from the moment that the division was agreed
upon and the two States were created that Pakistan is only a truncated Pakistan, that it is
merely a temporary madness on the part of the Muslim League that has brought about this
“secession,” that Pakistan will have to come into the Union as a penitent, repentant, erring
son and that the “two nation theory” is responsible for all that has taken place … Pakistan
will never surrender and never agree in any shape or form to any constitutional union
between the two sovereign States with one common centre. Pakistan has come to stay and
will stay.
While warning against attempts to bring about “a forced union” between the two countries, Jinnah
made it plain that Pakistan was “always ready to come to an understanding or enter into agreements
with Hindustan as two independent, equal, sovereign States” in the same way as “we may have our
alliances, friendships and agreements with any other foreign nation.”
A seasoned constitutionalist, Jinnah was dead set against autocracy, whether of the civilian or of
the khaki variety, substituting the rule of law. “Pakistan is now a sovereign State, absolute and
unfettered, and the Government of Pakistan is in the hands of the people,” he told a gathering of civil
servants in February 1948. As servants of a state that was “starting from scratch,” they had “a terrific
burden” on their shoulders, which he likened to a “sacred trust.” Until the constituent assembly had
completed framing the constitution, the governor-general continued, “our present provisional
constitution based on the fundamental principles of democracy not bureaucracy or autocracy or
dictatorship, must be worked.”
The reality on the ground was far removed from such high-minded rhetoric. An eyewitness to the
violence in Lahore recalled how rich and influential Muslims helped lowly gangsters in the old city to
attack their Hindu and Sikh neighbors and dishonor their women at knife’s point. The local police
assisted by providing canisters of petrol to the looters and looking the other way as non-Muslim
homes and shops were burned down and robbed.  Non-Muslim neighborhoods were set on fire and
emptied of the inhabitants and their belongings, ostensibly as revenge for similar attacks on Muslims
in India. One participant in the great migration recalled how most non-Muslim majority areas of the
city lay desolate. “You could get into any unoccupied house that you liked” and be assured of all the
domestic comforts as “their non-Muslim owners had fled and left everything behind.” The world had
suddenly changed. One could only dream of the days when Hindu women walked to the riverbank at
sunrise to offer prayers. There were some non-Muslims for whom separation from Lahore, the
magical city of gardens, was unbearable. One old Hindu woman in the Gwalmandi neighborhood of
the inner city yelled out from her first floor window: “I am never going to leave Lahore. People say
we are going to be killed, but I am staying right here. I will not abandon my home.”
Such resolve was rare. Appeals from the political leadership failed to put a stop to the wanton grab
for other people’s property and unpardonable dishonoring of women. The counterpoint of
communitarian triumphalism and hatred proved deadly, scarring individual and collective psyches on
both sides of the historic divide. Brutalized memories of 1947 have reinforced the contrasting yet
mutually clinging nationalisms of Pakistan and India and made it difficult to explain the human
tragedy of partition by anything other than religious motivation. If religion had any role in the human
atrocities of partition, it was mostly as profanity and not, as is often assumed, an expression of deeply
held faith. This was all the more reason why the violence and despoliation had to be given religious
justification.
While Islamic Pakistan used religion to justify its creation as a separate state, secular India
attributed the division to the religious “communalism” of the Muslim League. The claims and
counterclaims of Indian and Pakistani nationalism have drawn legitimacy from the brutalized
memories of millions who witnessed the dehumanizing scenes of their loved ones being put to the
sword and their property pilfered merely because they happened to belong to a specific religious
community. The interplay of official nationalisms and emotionally charged popular narratives of
partition created a haze of myth and sentiment, making it difficult to fathom why India was partitioned
along lines of religion for the first time in its millennia-old history.
Narratives from the Pakistani side of the divide for the most part adduced the “two-nation” theory
to explain why in the process of dismantling their Raj the British chose to divide India. Although
variants of this theory span a wide spectrum, all attribute partition to Muslims being a distinctive
community that had resisted assimilation into the Indian environment. Apart from glossing over the
long history of Muslim interactions with non-Muslims, the theory cannot explain why of the nearly
100 million Muslims in 1947, close to 40 million were left to their own devices in mainly Hindu
India. On the Indian side, the dominant nationalist narratives tended to revolve around variations on
the classic “divide and rule” theory. On this view, the British were responsible for tearing asunder two
communities that history and tradition had joined. By countering Indian nationalism with Muslim
communalism, the colonial rulers are believed to have manipulated religion for their own ends.
Neither the “two-nation” theory nor invocations of “divide and rule” provide coherent answers to
why the subcontinent was split along apparently religious lines at the moment of the British
withdrawal. Instead they have entangled the postcolonial nationalist narratives of both Pakistan and
India in a series of paradoxes. Pakistani nationalism’s reliance on the “two-nation” theory ended up
conflating the external contours of Muslim identity with the inner domain of personal faith in Islam.
In a mirror image, Indian nationalism’s reliance on a sharp opposition between secularism and
religious communalism blurred the distinction between religion as social demarcator of difference
and religion as lived faith. The result of this confusion has been a misconception of the precise role
of religion in the two countries. If Islamic Pakistan made too much of religion in its nationalist
narratives, secular India underplayed religion’s salience in the official annals of its nationalism. An
overemphasis on religion by Pakistan and its purported erasure by India has had important
consequences for their self-representations and mutual relations in the postindependence period.
Retrospectively constructed nationalist ideologies are no substitute for history. It was mainly
religion as identity, not the dream of an Islamic theocracy, which had spurred the AIML to demand the
creation of Pakistan in March 1940. When in December 1943 Jinnah’s friend and associate, Nawab
Bahadar Yar Jang, tried committing the Muslim League to a state based on Quranic principles, the
Quaid-i-Azam demurred, noting that the representatives of the people would decide the future
constitution of Pakistan. Although some Leaguers may have been concerned about matters of
personal piety, religion as faith was not the principal driving force behind the politics of difference in
late colonial India. The main impediments to evolving a framework for a united India were not
disputes over issues of religious doctrine but power-sharing arrangements between members of
different religious communities at the all-India level as well as in key regions like Punjab and Bengal.
By making an ideology of its secular claims and refusing to go beyond the framework of the liberal
paradigm to accommodate Muslim political aspirations, the Congress dealt a decisive blow to the
very unity that was sanctified in its vision of an inclusionary Indian nationalism. Adopting the
colonial state’s policy of privatizing religion, secular India undertook to guarantee the religiously
informed cultural identities of its Muslim citizens, albeit one that was strictly limited to the precepts
of the sharia as defined by the ulema.
As for Pakistan, the crystallization of Muslim hopes and distinctive culture, reconciling the claims
of nationhood with the winning of sovereign statehood proved impossible. The territorial contours of
the Muslim homeland ensured that there were nearly as many Muslim noncitizens outside as there
were Muslim citizens within. The contradiction was not addressed, far less resolved, and has been one

of the principal fault lines in Pakistan’s quest for an identity that is Islamic yet also national.
Proclaiming Islam as the sole basis of nationality, the architects of Pakistan had no qualms severing
all ties with coreligionists in India whose geographical location denied them citizenship rights in a
Muslim state created on the basis of a nonterritorially defined Muslim nation.
With doubts about its ability to survive being expressed both within and outside its freshly drawn
boundaries, Pakistan’s insecurities were given full play in fashioning the nation’s history. Using the
“two-nation” theory as their crutch, state-sponsored historians wrote histories for schools and
colleges as well as for more general consumption that highlighted the tyranny of the Hindu
community in order to justify the creation of Pakistan. A secondary purpose of this attack was to
undermine the influence of the Hindu community in the eastern wing. Estimated to be nearly 25
percent of the population, Hindus in East Bengal were prominent in business and a major component
of the Bengali intelligentsia on account of their leading role in the teaching profession and regional
literary circles. The early insistence on Urdu as the official language of Pakistan was not unconnected
with fears of a Bengali Hindu conspiracy to undermine the new state by retaining linguistic and
cultural connections with India.
An anti-Indian and anti-Hindu stance in state-supported historical reconstructions was considered
necessary for national self-preservation. However, in the initial decades of independence, the state’s
commitment to Islam was delicately balanced with a determination to preserve the secular ethos of its
main institutions, notably the civil bureaucracy and the military. Successive ruling configurations
paid lip service to the state’s Islamic identity without wholly succumbing to pressure from self-styled
guardians of religion. Appropriate steps were taken not to ruffle the sentiments of the religious
divines unduly. These included pledges to base the educational system on Pakistan’s Islamic ideology,
vaguely defined, but one that was deemed to be consistent with the state’s pro-Western foreign policy
and project of modernization. It followed that the self-styled religious leaders, mullahs as they were
referred to derogatively, could not be permitted to dictate the terms of the state-controlled curriculum.

An Islamic State?
There had been strident opposition to the Muslim League’s movement by several of the most vocal
proponents of an Islamic state in Pakistan. A former journalist and independent scholar, Abul Ala
Mawdudi was foremost among those who alleged that the demand for “Pakistan” was insufficiently
Islamic to warrant support from Muslim believers. In 1941, Mawdudi had founded the right-wing
Jamaat-i-Islami, which was ideologically linked with the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt. His
contention that Muslims would be better off in undivided India than in a separate state of their own
drew on the fantasy of fostering mass conversions of Hindus to Islam. A critic of pro-Congress
Muslim clerics and the Muslim League leadership, Mawdudi set forth a definition of Muslims that
excluded the majority of the faithful from the Islamic community. After moving to Lahore to escape
the violence in eastern Punjab, Mawdudi joined hands with other Islamist parties that had also
opposed the Muslim League’s movement to orchestrate a virulent campaign to convert Pakistan into
an Islamic state. The rank opportunism of these religio-political parties, combined with their
relentless criticism of the immoral lifestyles of its Westernized ruling elites, was one reason for the
state keeping them at arm’s length. Another was Jinnah’s explicit statement of intent on the role of
religion in the new state. Speaking extempore, he told the first meeting of the constituent assembly on
August 11, 1947, that if Pakistan wanted to count for something in the international comity of nations,
it would have to rise above the angularities of sect and community:
You are free; you are free to go to your temples. You are free to go to your mosques or to
any other places of worship in this State of Pakistan. You may belong to any religion or
caste or creed—that has nothing to do with the business of the State.… We are starting with
this fundamental principle that we are all citizens and equal citizens of the State … and you
will find that in course of time Hindus would cease to be Hindus and Muslims would cease
to be Muslims, not in the religious sense, because that is the personal faith of each
individual, but in the political sense as citizens of the State.
The speech stung the budding ideologues of the new state. Steps were taken at their behest to
ensure that the governor-general, by now a dying man, was never allowed to speak again without a
prepared script. An unrepentant Jinnah never retracted his position. In an interview to Reuters, he
referred to his speech in the constituent assembly, noting how he had “repeatedly made it clear” that
“minorities in Pakistan would be treated as our citizens”; they would “enjoy all the rights and
privileges that any other community gets” with “a sense of security and confidence” in the new state.
On February 3, 1948, he told a gathering of Parsis in Karachi that Pakistan intended to stand by its
promise to accord “equal treatment to all its nationals irrespective of their caste and creed.”
Embodying the aspirations of a nation that found itself in a minority in India, Pakistan could “not be
unmindful of the minorities within its own borders.” Later in a speech to the people of the United
States of America, Jinnah declared:
Pakistan is not going to be a theocratic State—to be ruled by priests with a divine mission.
We have many non-Muslims—Hindus, Christians, and Parsis—but they are all Pakistanis.
They will enjoy the same rights and privileges as any other citizens and will play their
rightful part in the affairs of Pakistan.
Jinnah’s early death in September 1948 robbed Pakistan of a much-needed steadying hand at the
helm during an uncertain and perilous time. With Jinnah no longer around to read the riot act,
constitutional propriety and strict adherence to the rule of law were early casualties of the withering
struggle between the newly created center and the provinces. Instead of a settled matter that was made
part of an honored constitutional document, there is bitter disagreement on the principles and practice
of minority rights in Pakistan more than six decades after its establishment. So although there is no
denying the centrality of Mohammad Ali Jinnah’s iconographic location in Pakistani national
consciousness, the gaping chasm between the nationalist icon and the savvy political practitioner
cannot escape historical scrutiny. Left to an adoring following in Pakistan and equally impassioned
detractors in India, the clear-headed lawyer who never missed a cue has been reduced to a jumble of
contradictions that mostly cancel each other out. Jinnah’s demonization in the Indian nationalist
pantheon as the communal monster who divided mother India contrasts with his positive
representation in Pakistan as a revered son of Islam, even an esteemed religious leader (maulana),
who strove to safeguard Muslim interests in India. Misleading representations of one of modern
South Asia’s leading politicians might not have withstood the test of history for as long as they have
if they did not serve the nationalist self-projections of both India and Pakistan.
Nations need heroes, and Pakistanis have a right to be proud of their greatest hero. But popular
memories too need to be informed by some historical context. Fed on improbable myths and the
limitations of the “great men” approach to history, Pakistanis have been constrained from engaging
in an informed and open debate on whether their country merits being called Jinnah’s Pakistan. Is
Jinnah at all relevant to the current Pakistani predicament? Brought up on state-sponsored national
yarns about the past, Pakistanis are at a loss over how to settle matters of national identity and the
nature of the state—democratic or authoritarian, secular or Islamic. The dismay, confusion, and
disenchantment enveloping the hapless citizenry are reason enough to return to the drawing boards of
history to assess Jinnah’s contemporary relevance. “Other men are lenses through which we read our
own minds,” Ralph Waldo Emerson once said, but the great man is one who “inhabits a higher sphere
of thought” and “keep[s] a vigilant eye on many sources of error.”  Though I am skeptical of
approaches to history restricted to studies of great men, it is difficult to disagree with Emerson, an
ardent expositor of biography, that we can learn more from those who were truly great than from
those making a mockery of being great in our own times.
After the death of the founding father in September 1948, Pakistan under its first prime minister,
Liaquat Ali Khan, became more vulnerable to pressures from the so-called religious lobby to enforce
the sharia. Playing on Islamic sentiments was a powerful weapon in the armory of religio-political
groupings like the Jamaat-i-Islami and the Majlis-i-Ahrar to acquire legitimacy in a state whose
formation they had vehemently opposed. The leadership of the new state was in no mood to be
dictated to by mullahs known for their anti-Pakistan postures. When it came to burnishing their
Islamic badges, they could draw on Muhammad Iqbal’s scathing view of the religious preachers of
Islam. “Why are the mullahs of this era the disgrace of Muslims?” the poetic visionary of Pakistan
asked. Religion was too important to be left to men with half-baked knowledge of Islam:
Oh Muslim, ask your own heart, don’t ask the mullah
Why has the sacred sanctuary been emptied of God’s men.
Leaving matters of state in the hands of such ignoramuses was out of the question. In Iqbal’s view, the
only purpose of the state in Islam was to establish a “spiritual democracy” by implementing the
principles of equality, solidarity, and freedom that constituted the essence of the Quranic message. It
was in “this sense alone that the State in Islam is a theocracy, not in the sense that it was headed by a
representative of God on earth who can always screen his despotic will behind his supposed
infallibility.”  Taking his cue from Iqbal, the Quaid-i-Azam had urged the members of the
constituent assembly to frame the future constitution of Pakistan on the Islamic principles of
democracy, equality, justice, and fair play for all. “What reason is there for anyone to fear
democracy, equality, freedom … [as] the highest standard of integrity and on the basis of fair play and
justice for everybody?” he had asked.
On March 7, 1949, while presenting the Objectives Resolution to Parliament, Prime Minister
Liaquat Ali Khan gave the clearest indication of where the balance lay between the would-be
ideologues of Islam and those guarding the inner sanctuaries of state power. The Objectives
Resolution, which served as the preamble to Pakistani constitutions until it was made part of the
constitution in 1985, ruled out the notion of an Islamic state as a religious theocracy. Heeding the
words of the founder, the resolution described Pakistan as a “sovereign, independent state” in which
power was to be exercised by the chosen representatives of the people and not the guardians of
religion. The Islamic principles of democracy, freedom, equality, tolerance, and social justice for all,
including the non-Muslim minorities, were to be the pillars of the state. At the same time, the state
undertook to ensure that its Muslim citizens lived their individual and collective lives in accordance
with the teachings of Islam. Maulana Shabbir Ahmad Usmani, the leading religious scholar at the time
and a product of the religious seminary of Deoband in India, supported the Objectives Resolution and
argued that there was no scope for rule by the clergy in Islam. At the same time, he welcomed the
resolution’s acknowledgment of God’s sovereignty over the universe and its promise to base the state
on the teachings of Islam.
A commitment to uphold the Islamic way of life, however defined, potentially contradicted
promises to the minorities assuring them freedom to practice their religions and develop their
cultures. The country’s first prime minister himself laid the basis for a measure of ambiguity by
proclaiming Pakistan as a “laboratory” for an Islamic social order, on the one hand, while also, on
the other, calling for “a truly liberal Government” that would permit the “greatest amount of
freedom” to all its citizens. An early indication of the lip service paid to religion for purposes of
political expediency, it should not be confused with a lowering of defenses against the selfproclaimed guardians of Islam that was to become characteristic of the Pakistani leadership after the
1970s. Liaquat Ali Khan let it be known in no uncertain terms that the malicious propaganda of the socalled religious leaders against the right of non-Muslims to equal citizenship would not be permitted.
The Objectives Resolution’s nods in the direction of theology were sufficient to embolden the
religious lobby to periodically hold the state accountable to its professed commitment to ushering in
an Islamic social order. Even as the frontiers of the moral state eluded its most vocal proponents, the
ambition was kept alive through well rehearsed and poignant attacks on the perceived immorality and
un-Islamic lifestyles of the country’s ruling elites, civil as well as military. This in turn built up
pressure for public displays of Islamic rectitude, however hypocritically and unconvincingly,
ultimately taking the form of an obsessive concern with guarding the Islamic frontiers of Pakistan’s
ideology against enemies within as well as without. With form replacing substance as the basis for
Pakistan’s Islamic identity, there was always opportunity for the self-appointed religious ideologues
to carp and complain about the state’s failure to govern according to the pristine principles of Islam.
Neither religion nor religiosity was much in evidence in the early years of the new Muslim
homeland. It was the pursuit of material advancement and plenty of opportunities for those who were
unscrupulously greedy that kept things ticking. On Independence Day in 1950, Manto, who had left
Bombay to join his family in Lahore, saw a man taking home a tree he had cut. When Manto stopped
and asked him, “what are you doing, you have no right to do this,” the man replied: “This is Pakistan,
this is our property.” One day he found a man pulling out bricks from the pavement outside his house.
When he said, “brother, don’t do this, it is most unfair,” the man replied, “This is Pakistan, who are
you to stop me?” The privilege of ownership bent the ruling elite’s sense of propriety completely out
of shape. In a metaphorical sense, all Pakistanis wanted a share of the spoils of division—a privilege
available only to a select few. The callousness of the rich and powerful elite of Pakistan, lording it
over a destitute and illiterate majority, was to become a proverbial truth in this much-vaunted Muslim
homeland. But its roots are traceable to the battles for social space that tore apart the historic ties
between communities of religion. A psychology of looting and disregard for the rule of law took
hold of the ruling coterie in Pakistan early on. The initial gold mine was the allotment of properties
abandoned by Hindus and Sikhs in Punjab and, subsequently, also in Sindh. Senior civil bureaucrats in
cahoots with prominent Muslim League politicians had the pick of the field but did not fail to pass on
some of the lesser goods as favors to those with contacts. Individual citizens with little or no
influence had to settle for whatever was left over, which in most cases was very modest. Justice and
fair play through rule of law had been the main connotation of the slogan “Pakistan Zindabad,”
certainly as popularized by Jinnah. The great constitutionalist could not have conceived that the
country he had established would honor his legacy by turning law into an instrument of denial for the
unprivileged and a tool to be manipulated for personal ends.
Pakistan’s new government proved incapable of giving the citizenry an elemental sense of
confidence in its ability to look after their well-being. A less tangible casualty of partition was the loss
of etiquette and a frantic rush to make the most of a twisted and ineffectual system of law. With the
rulers and the administrative bureaucracy blatantly on the take, the ruled soon realized that now that
freedom had been won, justice and fair play meant taking care of one’s own self-interest. Instead of
breaking with the colonial past, the citizens of independent Pakistan, individually and collectively,
opted to chip away at colonial laws that had been hastily adapted to serve as the country’s legal
framework until a new constitution could be framed. In the postpartition moral world, there was more
scope for advancement through devious dealings than there was in working hard for an honest
morsel of bread. With social ethics at a severe discount, it was only natural to seek ultimate refuge in

Islam, albeit an Islam that was more of a showpiece than a genuine blueprint for justice and fair play
as the enthusiasts of Pakistan had been led to believe.
This was the opening religio-political groups seized to claim authenticity for their own brand of
Islam, bristling with exclusivist, chauvinistic, and misogynist social values. An early indication of just
how significant a space had been conceded to the self-appointed guardians of Islam by the Objectives
Resolution was the agitation in 1953 to ostracize the heterodox Ahmadis from the pale of the Muslim
community. Ahmadis were accused of violating a fundamental tenet of Islam by portraying their
spiritual leader, Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, as a prophet. The anti-Ahmadi movement turned violent and
resulted in the first ever imposition of martial law in Pakistan. It was spearheaded by the same
elements that had been most vocal in denouncing the demand for Pakistan and abusing the Muslim
League’s preeminent leader. According to the 1954 inquiry commission set up to investigate the
causes of the disturbances, whose findings are known as the Munir Report, the passage of the
Objectives Resolution in the constituent assembly had led the ulema and the people of Pakistan to
believe that “any demand … on religious grounds would not only be conceded but warmly welcomed
by the people at the helm of affairs of the State.”  Most of the ulema questioned by the commission
said that declaring the Ahmadis non-Muslims had become imperative after the Objectives Resolution,
which left no room for doubt that Pakistan was created solely in the name of Islam. It followed that the
state had an obligation to define who was a Muslim and who was not.
The main target of the agitators’ wrath was Pakistan’s distinguished Ahmadi foreign minister,
Chaudhry Muhammad Zafrullah Khan, whom they accused of being a British agent. To disguise the
political nature of the movement, the agitators couched their demands in theological terms. Not to
have done so ran the risk of being charged with political opportunism given that the most prominent
names in the anti-Ahmadi movement had until recently either supported the Congress’s ideal of
secular nationalism or publicly opposed the creation of Pakistan. There were other practical issues
stemming from the demand to expel the Ahmadis from the Muslim community. As the commission
tartly noted, no two religious divines could agree on the definition of a Muslim. If the members of the
commission tried imposing a definition of their own, the ulema would unanimously declare them to
have gone outside the pale of Islam. Adopting the definition of any one religious scholar entailed
becoming an infidel in the eyes of all the others.
In the absence of any agreed definition of a Muslim, calls for an Islamic state were a rhetorical
device aimed at gaining political mileage rather than creating a workable blueprint for Pakistan.
Religious divines in the forefront of the anti-Ahmadi agitation, such as Mawdudi of the Jamaat-iIslami, maintained that non-Muslims were not entitled to equal rights of citizenship in an Islamic state.
Laying down a precise definition of a true believer was a dangerous game of brinksmanship. This
was why before the 1937 elections Jinnah had refused to endorse the demand to ostracize Ahmadis
from the Muslim community. With the establishment of Pakistan, there was even more reason to reject
the faulty logic of the anti-Ahmadi agitators. Even if they could not match his constitutionalist vision,
the last thing Jinnah’s successors needed was to inject an exclusionary strain into the narratives of the
nation at a time when the main challenge facing Pakistan as a modern nation-state was to extend equal
rights of citizenship to all its inhabitants.
Given the uncertain benefits of recourse to religion, Pakistan came to be ruled less by ideology
than by an institution. Bereft of a central state apparatus and confronted with severe administrative
dislocations in the most populous provinces of Bengal and Punjab, Pakistan’s political leaders relied
heavily in the first instance on a quickly reassembled bureaucracy. However, it was another
nonelected institution of state—the military—that would soon turn civil servants into junior partners
in the firm that ran Pakistan. The territories in the western wing of Pakistan had been the chief
recruiting grounds for Britain’s Indian Army. Punjabi Muslims and Pathans had figured prominently
since the late nineteenth century in colonial officialdom’s spurious anthropological theory about
martial races. Yet the conversion of Pakistan into a state of martial rule was not preordained. The
military’s rise to dominance as early as the 1950s can be understood only in the context of the
regional and global challenges of the Cold War.


