PROLOGUE: A TRYST WITH DESTINY
ON A WARM SUMMER NIGHT IN 1947, THE LARGEST EMPIRE THE world has ever seen did something no
empire had done before. It gave up. The British Empire did not decline, it simply fell;
and it fell proudly and majestically on to its own sword. It was not forced out by
revolution, nor defeated by a greater rival in battle. Its leaders did not tire or weaken.
Its culture was strong and vibrant. Recently it had been victorious in the century’s
definitive war.
When midnight struck in Delhi on the night of 14 August 1947, a new, free Indian
nation was born. In London, the time was 8.30 p.m.1 The world’s capital could enjoy
another hour or two of a warm summer evening before the sun literally and nally set
on the British Empire.
The constituent assembly of India was convened at that moment in New Delhi, a
monument to the self-con dence of the British government, which had built its new
capital on the site of seven fallen cities. Each of the seven had been built to last for ever.
And so was New Delhi, a colossal arrangement of sandstone neoclassicism and wide
boulevards lined with banyan trees. Seen from the sky, the interlocking series of
avenues and roundabouts formed a pattern like the marble trellises of geometric stars
that ventilated Mughal palaces. New Delhi was India, but constructed – and, they
thought, improved upon – by the British. The French Prime Minister Georges
Clemenceau had laughed when he saw the new city half-built in 1920, and observed: ‘Ça
sera la plus magnifique de toutes ces ruines.’2
Inside the chamber of the constituent assembly on the night of 14 August 1947, 2000
princes and politicians from across the 1.25 million square miles that remained of India
sat together on parliamentary benches. Yet amid all the power and nery, two persons
were conspicuous by their absence. One was Mohammad Ali Jinnah, the leader of the
Muslim League, who was in one of those parts of the Empire that had just become
Pakistan. His absence signi ed the partition of the subcontinent, the split which had
ripped two wings o the body of India and called them West and East Pakistan (later
Pakistan and Bangladesh), creating Muslim homelands separate from the predominantly
Hindu mass of the territory. The other truant was Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, who
was sound asleep in a smashed-up mansion in a riot-torn suburb of Calcutta.
Gandhi’s absence was a worrying omen. The seventy-seven-year-old Mahatma, or
‘great soul’, was the most famous and the most popular Indian since Buddha. Regarded
as little short of a saint among Christians as well as Hindus, he had been a staunch
defender of the British Empire until the 1920s. Since then, he had campaigned for Indian
self-rule. Many times it had been almost within his grasp: in 1922, 1931, 1942, 1946.
Each time he had let it go. Now, nally, India was free, but that had nothing to do with

Gandhi – and Gandhi would have nothing to do with it.
In the chamber the dignitaries fell silent as the foremost among them, Jawaharlal
Nehru, stepped up to make one of the most famous speeches in history. At fty-seven
years old, Nehru had grown into his role as India’s leading statesman. His last prison
term had nished exactly twenty-six months before. The fair skin and ne bone
structure of an aristocratic Kashmiri Brahmin was rendered approachable by a ready
smile and warm laugh. Dark, sleepy, soulful eyes belied a quick wit and quicker temper.
In him were all the virtues of the ancient nation, ltered through the best aspects of the
British Empire: con dence, sophistication, and charisma. ‘Long years ago,’ he began,
‘we made a tryst with destiny. And now the time comes when we shall redeem our
pledge; not wholly or in full measure, but substantially. At the stroke of the midnight
hour, while the world sleeps, India will awake to life and freedom.’ The clock struck
and, in that instant, he became the new country’s rst Prime Minister. The reverential
mood in the hall was broken abruptly by an unexpected honk from the back. The
dignitaries jerked their heads round to the source of the sound, and a look of relief
passed over their faces as they saw a devout Hindu member of the assembly blowing
into a conch shell – an invocation of the gods. Mildred Talbot, a journalist who was
present, noticed that the interruption had not daunted the new Prime Minister. ‘When I
happened to spot Nehru just as he was turning away, he was trying to hide a smile by
covering his mouth with his hand.’3
It was the culmination of a lifetime’s struggle; and yet, as Nehru later con ded to his
sister, his mind had not been on the splendid words. A few hours before, he had received
a telephone call from Lahore in what was about to become West Pakistan. It was his
mother’s home town, and a place where he had spent much of his childhood.4 Now it
was being torn apart. Gangs of Muslims and Sikhs had clashed in the streets. The main
gurdwara – the Sikh temple – was ablaze. One hundred thousand people were trapped
inside the city walls without water or medical assistance. Violence was a much-predicted
consequence of the handover, but preparations for dealing with it had been
catastrophically inadequate. The only help available in Lahore was from 200 Gurkhas,
stationed nearby, under the command of an inexperienced British captain who was only
twenty years old. They had little chance of stopping the carnage. The horror of that
night in Lahore set the tone for weeks of bloodshed and destruction. Perhaps the Hindu
astrologers had been right when they had declared 14 August to be an inauspicious date.
Or perhaps the Viceroy’s curious decision to rush independence through ten months
ahead of the British government’s schedule was to blame.
Emerging into the streets of Delhi, Nehru was greeted by the ringing of temple bells,
the bangs and squeals of reworks and the happy shouting of crowds. Guns were red,
in celebration rather than in anger; an e gy of British imperialism was burned, in
both.5 Soon afterwards, Nehru arrived at the Viceroy’s House, a gated citadel at the end
of Kingsway, New Delhi’s two-mile processional avenue. He and Rajendra Prasad, the
leader of the constituent assembly, were to see the last of the viceroys, Earl
Mountbatten of Burma.6
Mountbatten was young for a viceroy at forty-seven, but no less assured for it. Tall,

broad-shouldered and handsome, he had a brilliant Hollywood smile, easy wit and
immediate charm; it might never have been guessed that he had been born a prince,
were it not for his ability to switch to a regal demeanour. The new earl and his countess,
Edwina, had kept an appropriate distance from the festivities. While freedom was
declared, the couple had spent the night at home, pottering around their palace, and
helping the servants tidy away anything marked with an imperial emblem. They had
taken a brief break to watch the latest Bob Hope movie, My Favorite Brunette. It was a
pastiche of the fashionable noir genre: the story of a wayward but irresistible baroness,
played by the sultry Dorothy Lamour, whose feminine wiles drag a number of men into
a dangerous conspiracy. No more than a handful of those in the Viceroy’s House that
evening could have realized what a very apposite choice of film it was.
While Nehru had been declaring his nation’s independence and worrying about the
emerging crisis in Lahore, Mountbatten had been sitting in his study alone, thinking to
himself – as he later recollected – that ‘For still a few minutes I am the most powerful
man on earth.’7 At 11.58 p.m., he settled on a last act of showmanship, creating the
Australian wife of the Nawab of Palanpur a highness, in de ance of Indian caste
customs and British policy. It was an act epitomising Mountbatten’s character. Kingmaking was his favourite sport. Two minutes later, and the power had vanished.
Nehru and Prasad were greeted by the Viceroy’s wife, Edwina Mountbatten, still on
lively form despite the lateness of the hour. Vivacious, chic and slim, at forty- ve
Edwina was still in her prime. Her position as one of the world’s richest women had
never made her happy. But, over the course of the previous few years, she had nally
found a role for herself, leading health and welfare campaigns for the Red Cross and the
St John Ambulance Brigade. The heiress to millions had never been happier than when
she was working in the hot, rough and lthy refugee camps that had been set up across
the riot-scarred Punjab. In India, Edwina had blossomed, both in the revelation of her
own work and in her close friendships with the Indian leaders, particularly Gandhi and
Nehru. It was the second of these friendships that was already the subject of gossip in
Delhi society.
The warmth shared by India’s new Prime Minister and Lady Mountbatten was
obvious. It was equally obvious that Lord Mountbatten minded not at all. In contrast to
the erupting turmoil across the subcontinent, the scene between imperial lord and
victorious revolutionary that night was one of astonishing civility. For half a century
Nehru had devoted his life to this single goal of throwing o the yoke of the British
Empire. Now it was done, and his rst action as Prime Minister was to pay a call to the
power he had just displaced – and to o er it a job. ‘When one thinks of the sad years
that have led up to recent events,’ noted Lady Mountbatten, ‘I suppose this was the most
surprising development of all.’8
Nehru and Prasad were invited into Mountbatten’s study, followed by an unruly
gaggle of reporters. Photographers scrambled on to the furniture, standing on Frenchpolished tables to get the best angles, ring o a blitz of ashbulbs which shattered
noisily over the journalists who squeezed to the front. The exhausted Prasad began to
stammer an invitation for Lord Mountbatten to become Governor General of the new

Indian nation, but lost his words. Nehru stepped in to complete them, and Mountbatten
graciously accepted. He then poured out glasses of port for those present. ‘To India,’ he
proclaimed, holding his glass aloft. Nehru replied: ‘To King George VI.’ Few missed the
signi cance of the moment. Some years before, Nehru had refused to attend a banquet
in Ceylon on the grounds that toasts would be proposed to the King and the
government.9
But while in Delhi the gentlemen toasted nations and kings, their new world was
turning into a battle eld. As Viceroy, Lord Mountbatten had wielded unprecedented
power over the fates of two nations and 400 million people. He had transferred power
in a way that, within the next couple of days, would trigger a state of civil war in both
nations, followed by a war between the two of them. Millions of people would be
displaced; millions would be wounded; hundreds of thousands, perhaps millions more,
would die. During the next few days, riots would spread across the divided states of the
Punjab and Bengal, and a holocaust would begin.
The following night, the Mountbattens held a grand reception for Nehru at their
palace. In the gorgeous expanse of the Mughal Gardens, water owed from fountains
around terraces of pink stone from Jaipur; squirrels scampered up the trunks of
bougainvillea trees; the heavy scent of roses hung around sunken beds. The party was a
dazzling swansong for British India. Everyone had expected that such a day would be
glorious in India’s history; but, thanks to Mountbatten, it had somehow been made
glorious in Britain’s as well. Thanks to his impressive gift for public relations, the end of
Empire was presented as the purpose of Empire – India was as a well-nurtured and
fattened chick, raised to y from the imperial nest while Britain, the indulgent parent,
looked on with pride. And so the British were able to celebrate their loss alongside the
Indians who celebrated their victory. Comforting ctions were established that happy
night: that the British left India with dignity, having seen the error of their ways through
Gandhi’s soft but compelling persuasion; that the Indian independence campaign won
its prize by non-violence and civil disobedience; that the departure of the British was
completed with enough goodwill to pave the way for genuine friendship between India
and the west, and separately between Pakistan and the west; that the end of the British
Empire in India was a triumph for freedom.10
The world was rede ned that night, but not in the way that most of those present
thought. On either side of Old Europe, two new powers were rising to world superiority
– and both took a close interest in the new dominions of India and Pakistan. In the east,
Stalin’s Russia was in the process of supporting communist movements across Europe
and Asia, bolstering the in uence of Moscow and extending its borders. In the west, the
President of the United States of America had announced the Truman Doctrine just ve
months before. He had stated his intent to promote democracy across the world, and
resist the tide of communism owing forth from Russia. The Americans had become
particularly concerned about its ow into India, and Russian agents were already
suspected of funding Indian communist parties in Bengal. That very night, Nehru’s sister
and close con dante, Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit, was in Moscow, preparing to present her
credentials to Stalin as free India’s rst ambassador. Though its envoys were on good

terms with Nehru, the United States government was alarmed by these developments,
and moved fast to create a new alliance with Pakistan. During the nineteenth century,
Britain and Russia had played the ‘Great Game’ for control of Central Asia, focusing on
Afghanistan and the territory that would become West Pakistan. In 1947, the United
States was gearing up to play a new Great Game against Russia – and the slow but
signi cant rise of a fundamentalist Islamic movement would ensure that Afghanistan
and Pakistan would remain at the centre of international politics well into the next
century.
As darkness fell on 15 August 1947, Delhi’s Mughal Gardens glowed with thousands of
tiny lights set among the jacaranda trees, and with hundreds of distinguished guests.
Among the long avenues of gold mohur and ame-of-the-forest, princes chatted cordially
to freedom ghters, and Hindu radicals to British soldiers. There was a sense of hope
and magic, as two of the twentieth century’s greatest men ful lled their ultimate
ambitions. Nehru became leader of a free India, and Mountbatten played the role of a
king – with Edwina as his queen. Few of the guests watching this display would have
suspected that the celebration was about to be blown apart.

PART I
EMPIRE

CHAPTER 1: IN THEIR GRATITUDE OUR BEST REWARD

IN THE BEGINNING, THERE WERE TWO NATIONS. ONE WAS A vast, mighty and magni cent empire,
brilliantly organized and culturally uni ed, which dominated a massive swathe of the
earth. The other was an undeveloped, semi-feudal realm, riven by religious factionalism
and barely able to feed its illiterate, diseased and stinking masses. The rst nation was
India. The second was England.
The year was 1577, and the Mughal emperors were in the process of uniting India.
The domain spread 1200 miles along the tropic of Cancer, from the eerie white salt ats
of the Rann of Kutch on the shores of the Arabian Sea, to the verdant delta of the holy
River Ganges in Bengal; and from the snowy crags of Kabul to the lush teak forests of
the Vindhyan foothills. The 100 million people who lived under its aegis were
cosmopolitan and a uent. In 1577, the average Indian peasant enjoyed a relatively
higher income and lower taxation than his descendants ever would again. In the bazaars
were sold gold from Jaipur, rubies from Burma, ne shawls from Kashmir, spices from
the islands, opium from Bengal, and dancing-girls from Africa. Though governed by
Muslims under a legal system based loosely on sharia law, its millions of non-Muslim
subjects – Hindus, Sikhs and Buddhists – were allowed freedom of conscience and
custom.1
This empire was ruled by the world’s most powerful man, Akbar the Great. Akbar was
one of the most successful military commanders of all time, a liberal philosopher of
distinction, and a generous patron of the arts. He lived in unmatched opulence at
Fatehpur Sikri, in rooms done out in marble, sandalwood and mother-of-pearl, cooled by
the gentle fanning of peacock feathers. His hobbies were discussing metaphysics,
collecting emeralds, hunting with cheetahs and inventing religions; he had as his
plaything the Koh-i-Noor diamond, a gigantic, glittering rock weighing over 186 carats,
then almost twice its present size.2 His family came from Mongolia, and his court
showed a strongly Persian in uence. But Indians were accustomed to foreign rule. Since
the death of the indigenous Emperor Asoka in 232 BC, large parts of the subcontinent had
been conquered by Turks, Afghans, Persians and Tocharians, as well as by Mongols.
During a long and dramatic life, Akbar himself conquered and ruled over an area the
size of Europe.
In England, meanwhile, most of the population of around 2.5 million lived in a state
of misery and impoverishment. Politically and religiously, the country had spent much
of the sixteenth century at war with itself. Around 90 per cent of the population lived
rurally and worked on the land, going hungry during the frequent food shortages. They
were prevented from moving in to industry by the protectionist racket of guild entry

fees. Begging was common, and the nation’s 10,000 vagabonds the terror of the land.
The low standard of living endured by much of the population – two- fths of which
lived at subsistence levels – and squalid conditions in towns ensured that epidemics of
disease were common. The Black Death still broke out periodically, as did pneumonia,
smallpox, in uenza and something unpleasant called ‘the sweat’. Life expectancy stood
at just thirty-eight years – less than modern Sudan, Afghanistan or the Congo, and about
the same as Sierra Leone.3 The vast majority of the English people was illiterate and
superstitious: the discontent of communities often boiled over into rioting and witchhunts.
But by the 1570s, from the lthy soil of England, the rst green shoots of a pleasant
land were sprouting forth. The economy began to recover from years of in ation and
political instability. E orts were made by the Queen, Elizabeth I, towards religious
tolerance, and by her government towards forcing communities to take some
responsibility for the poor. After years of cultural backwardness, London society began
to aspire to re nement. ‘They be desirous of new-fangles,’ complained the Elizabethan
writer Philip Stubbs; ‘praising things past, condemning things present, and coveting
things to come; ambitious, proud, light-hearted, unstable, ready to be carried away by
every blast of wind.’4 In 1577, a blast of wind drove the English to a world beyond the
borders of Europe. At the request of the Queen, the pirate and explorer Francis Drake set
sail from Plymouth to bother the Spanish eet in the Paci c, and thence to
circumnavigate the globe.
Drake was not the only man at the court of Elizabeth whose mind was improbably
turning to world domination. In 1577, the philosopher, kabbalist and magus John Dee
conjured up the rst image of a ‘Brytish Impire’. At the time, Dee’s suggestion would
have seemed fanciful, though very few Englishmen could have known enough about
geopolitics to say so. Next to Akbar, Elizabeth was indeed a weak and feeble woman,
with her dubious breeding, her squabbling and faction-ridden court, her cluttered and
rickety palaces, and her grubby, unsophisticated, cold, dismal little kingdom.
Nonetheless, the greater monarch generously agreed to humour her shabby emissaries at
his fabulous court. They were overwhelmed: both Agra and Fatehpur Sikri were far
larger than London, and many times more wondrous. Ralph Fitch, a merchant, described
gilded and silk-draped carriages pulled by miniature oxen, and roads lined with markets
selling victuals and gemstones. ‘The King hath in Agra and Fatepore, as they do credibly
report, a thousand Elephants, thirty thousand Horses, fourteen hundred tame Deer, eight
hundred Concubines; such a store of Ounces, Tigers, Bu es, Cocks and Hawks that it is
very strange to see’, he wrote home.5 Fitch’s eventual return with stories of riches
undreamt of by the wondering English came at an apt moment in history. The mighty
Spanish Armada had been defeated, and England was starting to feel con dent and
expansive. Fitch was swiftly made a governor of Elizabeth’s Levant Company. It was the
beginning of four centuries of intimacy and exchange, a love–hate relationship between
India and Britain which would change the histories of both countries – and that of the
whole world – beyond what even the magus Dee could have predicted.
Twenty-three years later, in 1600, Elizabeth granted a charter to ‘The Governor and

Company of Merchants of London trading into the East Indies’ for fteen years. That
expiry date was cancelled by her heir, James I, giving the East India Company exclusive
trading rights in perpetuity. The only caveat: if it failed to turn a pro t for three
consecutive years, it voided all its rights. Thus a beast was created whose only object
was money. It would pursue this object with unprecedented success.
Over the following sixty years, the East India Company men’s adventures in
diplomacy brought them close to the Mughal emperors, and allowed them to gain
precedence over their Dutch and Portuguese rivals. Despite their obvious super cial
di erences, the Indians and the British were to nd that they shared many of the same
values and tastes. Both societies functioned through rigid class structures, gloried in their
strongly disciplined military cultures, and nurtured a blu , unemotional secularism
among their upper classes. Both prized swaggering but ultimately gallant men, and
spirited but ultimately demure women. Both enjoyed a sturdy sense of their own long
histories and continual ascendancy. Complicated codes of etiquette were vital to their
interaction; hunting on horseback and team sports dominated their social lives. As time
went on, they would even discover a shared taste for punctilious and obstructive
bureaucracy.
The British relationship with India would be of a di erent quality from those it had
with its other colonies. India was always the ‘Jewel in the Crown’: and the British found
that they often respected, understood and liked the Indian people, in a way that they
did not on the whole respect, understand or like the Chinese, the Aborigines, or the
various tribes of Africa. The sympathy was so convincing that intermarriage between
Britons and Indians became quite commonplace in the early years of the East India
Company. Many Britons emigrated permanently to India, where they set up home,
started families and raised dynasties.6
But the history of empire did not remain so cosy for long. After the English republic
fell and the monarchy was restored, King Charles II would turn the East India Company
into a monster. With ve acts, he gave it an amazing array of rights without
responsibilities. By the 1670s, the Company could mint its own coin, maintain its own
army, wage war, make peace, acquire new territories and impose its own civil and
criminal law – and all without any accountability, save to its shareholders. This was
pure capitalism, unleashed for the rst time in history. Combined with the gradual
fragmentation of Mughal control, which had begun after Akbar’s death in 1605, it would
prove to be almost unstoppable.
This private empire of money, unburdened by conscience, rampaged across Asia
unfettered until the 1850s. Guided only by market forces, it was both incredibly
successful and incredibly brutal. Adam Smith, the high priest of free trade and originator
of the ‘invisible hand’ theory of markets, was appalled by the result of a completely
unregulated corporation. ‘The di erence between the genius of the British constitution
which protects and governs North America, and that of the mercantile company which
oppresses and domineers in the East Indies, cannot perhaps be better illustrated than by
the di erent state of those countries,’ he wrote in his 1776 classic, The Wealth of
Nations.7 The British government was beginning to agree; and over the following

decades regulation began to creep in, act by act. Eventually, in 1834, the parliament in
London decided that an empire based on trade was in poor taste, and drew up a new
charter. The East India Company was still to govern, but no more to trade. Presenting
the scheme to parliament, Thomas Babington Macaulay freely admitted that licensing
out British sovereignty to a private company was inappropriate. ‘It is the strangest of
all governments,’ he said, ‘but it is designed for the strangest of all empires.’8 But the
British Crown could not bring its beast to heel. That would take a revolt by the Indians
themselves.
In the century after Robert Clive’s famous victory at Plassey in 1757, the East India
Company had embarked upon a run of military enterprises. Its armies fought the
Burmese twice, annexing Burma in 1852; the Afghans once; and the Sikhs twice, taking
the entirety of the Punjab by 1849. They took Gwalior in 1844, and conquered Sind in
1843, Nagpur in 1853, and Oudh in 1856. By then, almost 70 per cent of the
subcontinent could be called British territory.9 There had been some e orts at improving
the lot of the people of India, too, though not all of them were welcomed. E orts were
made to set up British schools in which Indians might be educated. Suttee, the burning of
live Hindu widows on the funeral pyres of their dead husbands, was banned in 1829.
The Company also attempted to stamp out thuggee, a brutal lifestyle adopted by bands
of professional thieves. The thugs were given to strangulation of their victims and
devoted to Kali, the goddess of death. They were held responsible for many thousands of
murders in the early nineteenth century.10 But this policy-making and interference,
these wars and laws, nally drew the attention of the Indian people to the fact that they
had been subjugated. Companies, it was thought, did not conquer, and therefore no
threat had been detected. The Mughals had been lulled by the promise of ever greater
riches, and had invited the East India Company across their own threshold. Once inside,
it had been able to suck the wealth and riches out of India, and impose its own regime –
all by the grace of the Indian rulers.11 ‘The English have not taken India’, wrote
Mohandas Gandhi succinctly in 1908; ‘we have given it to them.’12
There would be one great attempt to take it back by force, and that was the Indian
Mutiny of 1857.13 Famously, the spark for the Mutiny was the Company’s adoption of
the En eld ri e on behalf of its sepoys, the Indian soldiers serving in its army. The
cartridges for this particular model were supplied in greased paper, which had to be
bitten through before they were used. Rumours spread among the sepoys that the grease
contained tallow derived from cow or pig fat, thereby o ending both Hindus, who
revered the cow, and Muslims, who were forbidden to eat the pig. It has never been
proven whether the grease was actually objectionable, or whether the protests were
opportunistically started by Indian agitators to damage the East India Company.14
Whatever the truth, the Company made a public point of replacing its grease with a
version made from ghee and beeswax: but this action came too late. The rumours had
served their purpose. The scandal was the nal insult in a catalogue of British wrongs
against the Indians. The conquest of states, the commandeering of private lands, the
propping-up of corrupt local landlords who used torture to extract revenues, the
arbitrary imprisonments without trial, the evangelism of Christianity, and the attacks on

Indian cultural traditions – for not everyone had welcomed the outlawing of suttee –
had pushed Company dominance too far.15
After several small-scale rebellions, the Mutiny exploded with full force at the town of
Meerut, just north-east of Delhi. On 24 April 1857, eighty- ve troopers of the 3rd Light
Cavalry had refused to use their cartridges. A court-martial composed of fteen Indian
o cers found against the troopers on 8 May and sentenced them each to ve to ten
years’ hard labour. The following day, two regiments at Meerut turned on their o cers,
sprung the eighty- ve imprisoned sepoys from jail, and pillaged the town. The English
were shot, beaten to death, hacked at with swords, burned alive. Among the victims was
a seven-year-old girl, her skull sliced in two by a single stroke from a blade; and
pregnant twenty-three-year-old Charlotte Chambers, the foetus ripped out of her womb
and dumped contemptuously on her breast.16
By the morning of 11 May, the mutinous troops had marched south to Delhi and
joined with a garrison there. The rebels took the Red Fort, home of the heir to the
Mughal Empire, Bahadur Shah II. Bahadur Shah was a gentle and unimposing Muslim of
eighty-one years of age. He occupied his hours with poetry and courtly etiquette, was
said to believe rather eccentrically that he could transform himself into a gnat, and had
no jurisdiction beyond the walls of the Red Fort. He had been propped up and
pensioned by the Company, which found him useful in sustaining the illusion of Indian
self-government.17 The rebels seized on this reluctant and bewildered old man, and
persuaded him that he ought to demand his long-lost power back.
The restoration of the Emperor, precarious though it was, suggested that there was a
credible alternative to British private rule. As the news spread, uprisings surged across
north and central India, agitating one-third of the subcontinent by mid-June. But India
was a country of deep divisions, in which disparate factions had only been united by
their opposition to foreign rule. Where the British were ejected, these factions were left
to face the enormity of their di erences. Meanwhile, the British retained the support of
the Sikhs of the Punjab, the Pathans of the North-West Frontier, the Gurkhas of Nepal,
and the armies of Bombay and Madras. Neither Calcutta nor Simla, the two seats of the
Company’s administration, was attacked.18 Almost all the princes stayed loyal to the
British. The problem which had dogged the subcontinent since the death of Asoka, and
would continue to dog it until 1947, was becoming clear. Karl Marx had recently been
struck by the problem of India’s deep internal divisions. It was, he wrote, ‘A country not
only divided between Mohammedan and Hindu, but between tribe and tribe, between
caste and caste; a society whose framework was based on a sort of equilibrium, resulting
from a general repulsion and constitutional exclusiveness between all its members. Such
a country and such a society, were they not the predestined prey of conquest?’19
Within weeks, the British government sent its troops to the Company’s aid. The British
comeback would prove to be as brutal as it was predictable. Whole villages were burnt,
men lynched and shot, and women raped. The streets of Delhi were stormed and lay
lled with the bloated and stinking corpses of sepoys, provoking an outbreak of cholera
which killed many of the remaining inhabitants. Holy idols were smashed as the
plunderers searched for hidden jewels. Muslim rebel leaders were sewn into pigskins,

and force-fed pork; Hindus were doused with cows’ blood. Other instigators were
strapped to the muzzles of cannon, and blown to pieces.20 Bahadur Shah II ran away,
and hid in the tomb of Akbar’s father, Humayun – a mausoleum to the south of Delhi
that stood as a monument to prouder Mughal days. The British found him, carried him
o , and con ned him to a house in Delhi; there he was kept to be gawped at by any
European who cared to inspect him.21 One family had a particularly lucky escape. Police
Constable Gangadhar Nehru was eeing Delhi across the Jumna River with his wife,
Indrani, and their four children. The family was from Kashmir, with the typically pale
skins and hazel eyes of that region’s people – so pale that some British soldiers mistook
one of the daughters for an English girl, and accused Gangadhar of kidnapping her.
Only his son’s pro ciency in English, and the testimony of a passerby, saved the
family.22 Four years later, Indrani would give birth to another son, Motilal Nehru, who
would in his turn father the first prime minister of independent India.
And so, in 1858, the relationship between Britain and India moved into its most
intense phase: the raj.23 On 2 August, the Government of India Act transferred all the
East India Company’s rights to the British Crown – which made it clear that the status
quo would remain. Across great expanses of India, the maharajas, rajas and nawabs
would be left in charge, with only a British Resident present in their capitals to keep an
eye on things. The East India Company had long reasoned that ruling would be far
easier through existing structures than through new creations. The landowners and
princes propped up by the British enjoyed almost unlimited power, and consequently
felt no need to challenge the British raj. In 1858, Queen Victoria proclaimed: ‘We hold
ourselves bound to the natives of our Indian territories by the same obligation of duties
which bind us to all our other subjects. In their prosperity will be our strength; in their
contentment our security; and in their gratitude our best reward.’24
In response to this spirit of cooperation, India became the favourite investment
opportunity of European nanciers. Industry boomed, with the production and
processing of tea, co ee, cotton, jute and indigo. New roads and railways criss-crossed
the plains, and wove in and out of the hills. The rst steamships began to arrive at
Bombay. After the Suez Canal opened in 1869, it was possible to get from Europe to
India in just three weeks – half the time it had taken aboard the old sailing boats. Young
Britons would often serve a tour of duty in India, either on military or civil service. It
was easy for these fellows to get used to the luxuries to which a white skin and the low
cost of living entitled them. Attitudes hardened, rather than liberalized, as the Empire
went on: Indians were commonly referred to as ‘natives’ in the eighteenth century,
‘coolies’ by the end of the nineteenth, and ‘niggers’ by the beginning of the twentieth.
Eventually, the Britons would return to sleepy cottages in the Home Counties, bringing
back rugs, jewels and a taste for curried food, along with a dreamy nostalgia for their
days as lords of a tropical paradise. The enthusiasm caught on at the highest level.
Queen Victoria herself, the rst and last Empress Regnant of India, was deeply
interested in Indian culture and even learnt to speak Hindustani. She was tutored by her
most trusted attendant, Abdul Karim, to whom she developed an attachment that verged
on the romantic. Though she never made it to India herself, she sent her son, the future

Edward VII, to meet the princes and shoot tigers in 1875. He was accompanied by a
young aide-de-camp, Prince Louis of Battenberg.25
By the late nineteenth century, the cream of Indian society began to enjoy its British
connections. Fashionable Indians went to Oxford or Cambridge for their education, and
London for their tailoring: they read voraciously the classics of English literature, and
often spoke English as their rst language. New generations were growing up with
notions of equality, democracy, citizenship, blind justice and fair play, only to discover
that none of these rights actually applied to them. Indians were all but prevented from
joining the administration of their own country by the deliberately obstructive entry
procedure for the Indian Civil Service. Certain clubs, public places and even streets were
designated ‘Europeans only’.
The Indian upper classes found it hard to reconcile their proud Anglophiliac
upbringings with the reality of their exclusion. At Eton, Harrow and Winchester, they
identi ed themselves with the gilded youth of a glorious empire. Only in adulthood did
they discover that their race relegated them to the second rank. ‘The fact that the British
Government should have imposed this arrangement upon us was not surprising; but
what does seem surprising is that we, or most of us, accepted it as the natural and
inevitable ordering of our lives and destiny’, wrote one of those Harrow-educated sons
of India, many years later. ‘Greater than any victory of arms or diplomacy was this
psychological triumph of the British in India.’26
Those words would be written by Gangadhar Nehru’s grandson, Jawaharlal Nehru.
But in 1877, Britain was still ascending towards the peak of its global in uence. Exactly
300 years after a sorcerer had suggested the idea to another Queen of England, Victoria
assumed the imperial throne in absentia during a splendid durbar in Delhi, her crown
resting on a gilded cushion. As the massed ranks of the Indian Army cheered their new
Empress, one of the most terrible famines of all history was underway in the south. Five
million would waste and die, while the Viceroy and his government clucked about
maintaining ‘strict regard for the severest economy’ and refused to undertake any
further ‘disastrous expenditure’.27 The mechanisms of Empire had primed India for
revolution. The only surprise would be just how long it would take.

CHAPTER 2: MOHAN AND JAWAHAR

ON 2 OCTOBER 1869, A SON WAS BORN INTO A MIDDLE-CLASS family in Gujarat, a collection of princely
states under British authority on the western coast of India. Mohandas Karamchand
Gandhi had an ordinary childhood, culminating, as ordinary childhoods often do, in a
teenage rebellion. This revealed a boy whose desire to experiment was usually halted by
an immobilizing timidity in the actual act of de ance. He tried smoking, and stole gold
from his family to nance it; but this upset him morally, and so he stopped. Though
from a strictly vegetarian family, he tried eating meat; but this upset him physically,
and then morally as well, and then he dreamt of a live goat trapped in his stomach,
bleating, so he stopped that too. Once he was egged on to visit a prostitute, but stood in
the brothel having a crisis of con dence until the woman shouted at him to go away. On
another occasion, he and a cousin ventured into the jungle to kill themselves by
overdosing on datura, the narcotic seeds of the thorn apple – but, once they found the
plant, they lost their nerve.1
This boy’s family was reasonably well o and of a middling but respectable caste.
Hindu society had been divided for over 1700 years into four main castes, re ecting
second-century social groups: Brahmins (priests), Kshatriyas (warriors), Vaishyas
(merchants), and Sudras (farmers). Within each of these were hundreds of minute
subdivisions, and below them a mass of outcastes, or ‘untouchables’ – those unfortunates
who, condemned by the bad karma of previous incarnations, were destined to spend
their lives sweeping, begging, scrubbing latrines and cleaning up corpses. The Gandhi
family were Vaishyas, and within that were of the Bania subdivision. Banias were
notorious for being hard-bargaining salesmen, a trait which young Mohan evidently
inherited, and would one day apply to spiritual and political ends with unprecedented
effect.
Mohan’s rebellion was perhaps more unusual because the supposed cure for youthful
misbehaviour had already been administered. Karamchand and Putliba Gandhi had
already married their thirteen-year-old son to a girl from a staunchly religious family.
The girl who had been chosen, Kasturbai Makanji (known according to local tradition as
Kasturba later in life, when she became matriarch of the household) was also just
thirteen.2
During daylight hours, etiquette decreed that Mohan and Kasturbai should ignore each
other completely. Even an a ectionate word between husband and wife was considered
taboo. As darkness fell, they were left to their own devices – though neither had much
idea what those should be. Mohan went to the bazaar to buy pamphlets, hoping to learn
about his conjugal rights and duties. He was taken with the concept of delity, and
decided it should be his task to extract this from little Kasturbai. He told her that she

could no longer leave the house without his consent.
But, despite her youth, Kasturbai had already mastered the most e ective technique
available to women who live in extremely restrictive societies: that of passive resistance.
She was a devout Hindu from a very traditional background, and would not openly
disobey her husband. Instead, she found a loophole.
Mohan’s mother asked Kasturbai to accompany her to the temple every day. Because
this request was made in the daytime, when the young spouses were not supposed to
communicate, Kasturbai was unable to ask Mohan’s permission. To disobey the
command of the matriarch, on the other hand, would have been a terrible sin. So
Kasturbai went with Putliba to the temple, and returned to have her rst ght with her
husband, which she won by the sheer power of logic. Mohan was forced to remove the
restrictions he had placed on Kasturbai.3
This small incident would hardly be worthy of note, except for the fact that it formed
the basis for Gandhi’s entire political method. In later years, when he found that he was
at a disadvantage being an Indian in a white world, he would remember and develop
the tactic of a woman in a man’s world. All Gandhi’s most famous tactics – passive
resistance, civil disobedience, logical argument, non-violence in the face of violence,
emotional blackmail – had came from Kasturbai’s in uence. He freely admitted this: ‘I
learned the lesson of non-violence from my wife.’4
Though his father had been Prime Minister of the princely state of Porbandar, young
Mohan had not yet found any reason to involve himself in politics. Porbandar was over
800 miles from Bombay, where, in 1885, a Scotsman called Allan Octavian Hume
founded the Indian National Congress. Congress enjoyed no legal status, but acted as a
forum and a mouthpiece for Indian (as well as progressive British Indian) opinion. It
was far from being a revolutionary organization; its foundation was approved by the
Viceroy.5 Its modest claims included a greater share of government for educated Indians,
along with citizenship and equal rights with other members of the British Empire.
In Gujarat, Mohan and Kasturbai went through adolescence, and Kasturbai became
pregnant for the rst time. But their lives were to be disrupted by the illness of Mohan’s
father, Karamchand, who was consigned to his bed with a stula in 1885. The son took
on the duty of nurse. ‘Every night whilst my hands were busy massaging my father’s
legs, my mind was hovering about the bedroom,’ he admitted. It was an ill-fated
juxtaposition. One night, Mohan’s uncle o ered to massage Karamchand. Eagerly
accepting, Mohan went to Kasturbai. Though it was considered a sin against God to
have sex with a pregnant woman, Mohan did so; and, just ve or six minutes
afterwards, received the most horrible shock of his young life. A servant knocked at the
door to tell him his father had died.
Mohan rushed to Karamchand’s room, overwhelmed with grief and, more importantly,
with guilt. ‘I saw that, if animal passion had not blinded me, I should have been spared
the torture of separation from my father during his last moments’, he later wrote. In the
boy’s distraught mind, his lust had killed his father. Pleasure was immediately con ated
with destruction. In the development of his philosophy and his life, Mohan began to
look for salvation in self-denial and discomfort. His father’s death was ‘a blot I have

never been able to efface or forget’, he confessed at the age of fifty-six.
As if to con rm Mohan’s sense that he had brought a curse upon himself, Kasturbai
gave birth to a weak and ailing infant. ‘I may mention that the poor mite that was born
to my wife scarcely breathed for more than three or four days,’ wrote Gandhi. ‘Let all
those who are married be warned by my example.’6
In June 1888, the couple had a healthy baby, Harilal. Three months after his son was
born, Mohandas Gandhi set sail for London.
Going to London was a brave move for the nineteen-year-old Mohandas. He faced
opposition from his mother, who made him swear a solemn vow in front of a Jain monk
to abstain from what she correctly imagined were the corrupting in uences of London
life: eating meat, drinking and whoring. He faced even more daunting opposition from
the Bania community. When the elders in Bombay heard that Mohandas was planning
to cross the Arabian Sea, they met to discuss the matter – and concluded that, because
none of them had ever been to Britain, it must be ‘polluting’ to do so. If Mohandas went,
he would be rejected by his caste, and would forever rank among the outcaste sweepers
and scavengers.7 Mohandas ignored these dire pronouncements, and got on the next
boat. He would not see his wife and child again for three years.
In 1888, London was one of the greatest and richest cities on earth. Mohandas was
not impressed, nding it expensive and strange, with bland food and incomprehensible
customs. ‘At night the tears would stream down my cheeks, and home memories of all
sorts made sleep out of the question’, he wrote.8 He had an interest in medicine but,
mindful of his family’s opposition to the dissection of dead bodies, instead enrolled at
the Inner Temple to study law.9 In London, Mohandas dressed in a very di erent garb
from the one in which he would eventually nd fame. He was seen in Piccadilly wearing
a pin-striped morning suit, sti Gladstonian collar, silk topper and spats over his patent
shoes, as well as what a fellow Indian student remembered as being ‘a rather ashy
tie’.10 But this fashionable rig represented a meticulous nature, not pro igacy. Adrift in
the decadent luxury of London, Mohandas tended towards ever more stringent
economies. He lodged in one room in Baron’s Court. He walked everywhere. He stopped
ordering spices from India, and subsisted on a diet of porridge, cocoa and plain boiled
spinach. He became popular: with one bottle of wine between each four students at
Inner Temple dinners, everyone wanted to sit beside the teetotaller from Gujarat.11
One day he stumbled across one of Victorian London’s few meat-free restaurants, the
Centre in Farringdon Road, and joined the Vegetarian Society of England.12 Thanks to
his new friends in the Society, he started reading Christian writers, such as Leo Tolstoy
and John Ruskin, who would rank among his strongest in uences. They also induced
him to read the Bhagavad Gita for the rst time.13 From this point he began to develop
his personal philosophy. It was rooted in Hindu scripture, but incorporated many of the
anti-materialistic and abstinent values of early Christianity and Jainism. He considered
it to be applicable to all faiths. Central to his message was a motto: ‘God is truth’.14
Mohandas returned to India in 1891. He went through a puri cation ceremony to reenter his caste, and began to practise law in Bombay. The results were lacklustre. When,
in 1893, a businessman o ered him a job in South Africa for three years, he decided it

was best to take this opportunity, and left his family again.
The trip to South Africa was to change the course of his life. For the rst time, Gandhi
would experience the full force of colonial racism. Only a week after his arrival, he was
physically thrown from a train at Maritzburg. Having bought a rst-class ticket, he had
presumed it was his right to sit in the rst-class compartment. The conductor thought
otherwise, and had him ejected by a policeman. He proceeded by stagecoach, and was
beaten up by the coach-leader because he had asked to sit inside the coach, rather than
on a dirty piece of sackcloth on the footboard. On his eventual arrival in Johannesburg,
the Grand National Hotel refused to let the well-dressed Indian barrister have a room.15
Mohandas Gandhi had arrived in what was, for an Indian, one of the most hostile
territories on earth. The 150,000 Indians in South Africa were described in the statute
books as ‘semi-barbarous Asiatics, or persons belonging to the uncivilised races of Asia’,
and were subject to an array of punitive restrictions designed to make their lives as
di cult and unpro table as possible. 16 Gandhi launched a campaign that demanded
equal rights for Indians in South Africa as citizens of the British Empire. On 22 May
1894, he inaugurated the Natal Indian Congress – modelled on the Indian National
Congress, of which he had read but never yet attended. The suspicion of the authorities
was immediately aroused. Two years later, when he brought his wife and children to
South Africa, it was made obvious that the Gandhis were not welcome. The port
supervisors refused to let their ship dock for twenty-three days. When they disembarked,
Gandhi was attacked by a mob of white men, who threw stones, bricks and eggs at him,
before setting on him with punches and kicks. He was saved by the wife of the police
superintendent, who bravely interposed herself, armed only with a parasol. Later that
day, a lynch mob surrounded the house where the Gandhi family was hiding.
For once in his life, Gandhi was persuaded not to confront his enemies, on the
grounds that this would put his family and friends in even more danger. Instead he
disguised himself as a policeman, with a tin pan wrapped under his turban for defence,
and thus attired made it to the local police station.17 He had been so badly beaten after
getting o the ship that it was two days before he could make a statement, but he
refused to bring charges against his attackers.18 This disinclination to see punishment
enacted distinguished Gandhi from other political agitators. Here was something new –
and it would attract murmurs of surprise, and even admiration, in the international
press.
During 1897, with Kasturba pregnant again, Mohandas invited several young law
clerks to live with the family. He started to implement rules inspired by the vision of
society o ered by Ruskin and Tolstoy, aimed at egalitarian, cooperative living, and a
pure devotion to God through asceticism. One of the founding principles was that
everyone was supposed to empty and clean their own chamber pots – a task which
Hindus normally delegated to the Untouchables. Kasturba was appalled, not least
because of the rule that she and Mohandas had to clean any that had been forgotten.
One day, when a Christian Indian of Untouchable parentage accidentally left his pot
unemptied, she found it. She refused to move it, to which Mohandas replied that he
would clean it himself. For a Hindu wife to allow her husband to de le himself is

considered an even greater degradation than to pollute her own body. Weeping with
anger and humiliation, Kasturba lugged the pot down the stairs outside the house. Little
did she realize that Mohandas was watching. He lost his temper, shouting that not only
must she carry around buckets of excrement, but that she should do so cheerfully. She
threatened to walk out, at which point Mohandas grabbed her roughly by the arm. He
dragged her to the gate and tried to shove her through it. She sobbed that she had
nowhere to go. At this, he relented, and let her back.19
The incident illustrated Gandhi’s growing belief that personal life was an integral part
of politics. He insisted on leading by example, no matter what the consequences were
for himself, his family, his friends or his followers. In 1899, he demonstrated this again
on a grander scale when the Boer War broke out. In spite of his personal sympathy with
the Dutch settlers, Gandhi’s reaction was that the Indians must support the British. If
they demanded British rights, he reasoned, they must shoulder British responsibilities. He
set up the Indian Ambulance Corps and actively recruited his countrymen in the name of
the Queen-Empress. The Indians served without pay, and would march up to twenty- ve
miles every day, bearing the British Empire’s wounded on stretchers back to their camps.
Gandhi’s courage, hard work and patriotism paid o . He was awarded the War Medal,
and the Indian Ambulance Corps was mentioned in dispatches.20
The Ambulance Corps was an early example of Gandhi’s air for the grand gesture.
The de ning motif of self-sacri ce was important. After the birth of his fourth surviving
son, Devadas, in 1900, he attempted to become a brahmachari – a celibate. This decision
was strengthened by the family’s move from their villa to the rst of his formal ashrams
(semi-monastic community retreats) in 1904. Gandhi believed that the community would
grow more intimate overall if its members had no special favourites, either through
sexual intimacy or family ties.21 There was also the aspect of sin. In his young teens,
Mohandas had learnt in the most devastating way to associate sex with moral and
physical ruin. In adult life, he began to consider any form of physical pleasure – food,
comfort and intoxication, as well as sex – to be degrading, and any form of physical
torment – fasting, scrubbing latrines, wearing prickly homespun cloth, being beaten up
by the police – to be righteous.
In 1907, Gandhi coined the term satyagraha, a Sanskrit word, meaning literally ‘truthforce’. The intent was to imply a powerful but non-violent energy.22 During October
1908, while he was in prison for civil disobedience, his commitment was to be tested.
Kasturba fell seriously ill. It was possible for Gandhi to have himself released at any
time: all he had to do was plead guilty, pay the modest ne, and walk out from the
prison gates. But Gandhi was not prepared to admit guilt. Friends, family, life and death
meant less to him than truth, faith and politics. ‘I am not in a position to come and
nurse you’, he wrote to Kasturba; ‘if it is destined that you shall die, I think it is
preferable that you should go before me … Even if you die, for me you will be eternally
alive.’ He assured her that he had ‘no intentions’ of remarrying after her death, and told
her that her demise would be ‘another great sacri ce for the cause of Satyagraha’.23
Kasturba survived.
When Gandhi returned to India in 1915, he still did not appear to be the sort of man

who shook empires. He seemed to be exactly the opposite. In the King’s birthday
honours of 3 June 1915, Mohandas Gandhi of Ahmedabad was awarded the Kaiser-iHind (Emperor of India) medal for services to the British Empire.24 It was Sir
Rabindranath Tagore, the Bengali poet and Nobel Laureate, who bestowed upon Gandhi
the title by which he would become known. Tagore dubbed him ‘Mahatma’, meaning
‘great soul’. But the great soul would require a great lieutenant to link him to the
temporal world. In one of history’s more surprising pairings, the lieutenant would be an
upper-class Brahmin lawyer, the sophisticated product of Harrow and Cambridge, who
spoke Indian languages only haltingly, and did not believe in God at all. And yet,
despite their di erences, the combined strength of Mohandas Gandhi and Jawaharlal
Nehru would one day command the attention of the world.
While Gandhi was experimenting with truths, another Indian youth was preparing to go
to England for his education. This boy was a far more promising student than Gandhi
had been at the same age. He was also more sophisticated, more con dent, more
charming, much wealthier and conspicuously better looking. It was little surprise that
young Jawaharlal Nehru was the apple of his father’s eye – and that father happened to
be one of India’s top lawyers and an emerging gure in the Indian National Congress,
Motilal Nehru.
Motilal Nehru was a colossus, of broad shoulder and imposing countenance. It was
often remarked that, in pro le, he resembled a Roman emperor. He dominated any
gathering, both physically and intellectually. He was incisive, bullish, witty, warm, and
occasionally ery. He impressed everybody. Even the British attempted to change their
own race rules so that they could invite him to join their clubs.25 He presided over a
cheerfully integrated, Westernized and lavish household in the grandest mansion in
Allahabad, Anand Bhavan. Under Motilal’s roof, no distinction was drawn between
Hindus, Muslims, mixed-race Anglo-Indians, Untouchables and Europeans.26
As the beloved only child of a very privileged family, young Jawahar (as he was
known) was haughty, re ned and more than a little spoiled. Lacking brothers or sisters,
and schooled at home without classmates, he soon learned to direct his thoughts and
questions inwards. He developed a capacity for merciless self-judgement which,
ultimately, would set him apart from other statesmen.
Jawahar only made it to the age of ve or six before feeling the full power of his
father’s fearsome temper. Motilal had two smart fountain pens in his study; his son took
one without asking. A massive search ensued, during which the terri ed Jawahar kept
silent. The pen was eventually discovered in his possession, and Motilal administered a
ferocious beating to the tiny boy. Even forty years later, when he was a veteran of
several beatings at the hands of armed policemen, Jawahar’s memory of this rst
encounter with violence remained raw. ‘Almost blind with pain and morti cation at my
disgrace I rushed to Mother,’ he wrote, ‘and for several days various creams and
ointments were applied to my aching and quivering little body.’27 But he did not hate
his father for the pain he had su ered, nor even for the injustice of such a punishment.

The explosive Nehru temper was hereditary, and the boy, though naturally of a gentle
and even quiet disposition, soon learned to imitate his father’s outbursts. Later in life, he
would become notorious for thumping those who irritated him.28
The counterpoint to this awestruck relationship with his father was the simple,
comforting love Jawahar had from his mother, Swarup Rani. She cuddled him after
Motilal’s thrashings, and o ered him the beguiling images of Hinduism while Motilal
doggedly maintained his secularism. For a while, Jawahar felt himself pulling towards
the softer, more spiritual side of the Nehru household. He experimented with religion
and, under the in uence of his tutor, Ferdinand T. Brooks, even signed up to one.
Theosophy had been invented in 1875 in England, and relied on fusing parts of
Hinduism and Buddhism with the late nineteenth-century European fashions for
mysticism, esoteric rituals, and attempted communion with the spirit world. Annie
Besant, one of the religion’s most notable devotees and later a leading advocate for
Indian independence, inducted Jawahar herself. He was thirteen years old.29 Not long
afterwards Mr Brooks left, and young Jawahar’s creed departed shortly after.
Initially Jawahar had scorned his father’s strict rationalism as unimaginative. But
ultimately, as with the temper, he could not help but emulate it. Faced with the
indulgent comforts of his mother’s love, and the hard-headed challenge of his father’s,
Jawahar preferred the challenge. Though he adored her, part of him began to look down
on his mother. Her love for him, he wrote, was ‘excessive and indiscriminating’. If
Jawahar was to become a man, it was clear which path he had to follow; and religion,
he concluded superciliously, ‘seemed to be a woman’s affair’.30
In 1900, his rst sister was born and named Sarup, which she hated. On marriage, she
would rename herself Vijaya Lakshmi, but was always known as Nan. A second sister,
Krishna, known as Betty, would follow seven years later. Jawahar doted on Nan, but the
gap of eleven years between them prevented her from becoming a con dante until later
in life.31 The lonely boy continued to live a large part of his life inside his head, as a
recurring dream he began to have at around this time illustrates. ‘I dreamt of astral
bodies and imagined myself ying vast distances’, he wrote. ‘This dream of ying high
up in the air (without any appliance) has indeed been a frequent one throughout my
life; and sometimes it has been vivid and realistic and the countryside seemed to lie
underneath me in a vast panorama.’ The Russo-Japanese War was in progress, and
news of Asian victories over Europeans sparked Jawahar’s imagination. At night he
dreamt of ying over Indian domains; during the day, he pictured himself as a noble
knight, sword in hand, freeing beautiful Asia from her wicked European overlords.32
In 1905, when Jawahar was fifteen, he went with his parents and Nan on a journey to
the heart of the overlords’ territory. They reached Britain in May, and deposited
Jawahar at Harrow School in north London. Following in the footsteps of Winston
Churchill seventeen years before, he joined the Head Master’s House, an imposing redbrick building on the High Street. Life at Harrow was designed to confuse outsiders, with
its esoteric traditions, colour-coded bow ties, and private language of beaks, bluers,
shepherds and philathletes. Initially this made him homesick, but Jawahar soon learned
to conform to the school’s eccentricities. ‘I had deliberately not resisted them so as to be

in harmony with the place,’ he later acknowledged. But, within this complicit young
denizen of the British establishment, there were already hints of a more controversial
future. When he received a volume on Garibaldi as a school prize, Jawahar found
himself identifying strongly with the revolutionary soldier, atheist and republican, who
had made possible the unification of Italy less than half a century before.33
After two years Jawahar became bored with Harrow, though in adult life he
remembered it with nostalgia. Many years later, when he had become a revolutionary
soldier, atheist and republican, he would dig out a dusty volume of Harrow school songs
from the library at Anand Bhavan. There, over six thousand miles from the Head
Master’s House, he sat with his nieces Lekha, Tara and Rita, singing rousing choruses of
‘Jerry, You Du er and Dunce’ and ‘When Grandpapa’s Grandpapa was in the Lower
Lower First’.34 Grandpapa’s grandpapa had been a landowner in Delhi, and appeared
regularly at the Mughal court.35 But the mature Jawahar would be able to enjoy his
European refinements without compromising his Indian identity.
At seventeen, Jawahar persuaded Motilal to let him go up to Trinity College,
Cambridge, where he read natural sciences. A lover of nature, he specialized in
chemistry, botany and geology. In his spare time, he went riding, learned ballroom
dancing, coxed a college rowing boat in the Lent races, and pursued a satisfying social
life.36 Jawahar later wrote with a happy sentimentalism of winter evenings spent by the
re, talking about culture, politics, sex and morality until the embers died out, and the
sharp cold of a draughty old sandstone college forced him and his friends to bed.37 The
conversations about sex struck him in particular. ‘Most of us were strongly attracted by
sex and I doubt if any of us attached any idea of sin to it,’ he wrote. ‘Certainly I did not;
there was no religious inhibition.’ And, a few lines later, he added: ‘I enjoyed life and I
refused to see why I should consider it a thing of sin.’38 His defensiveness on the matter
is intriguing, but there are no further clues to follow. Certainly he was not yet the
intoxicating draw for women that he would be in his later years.
At around this time, his father’s thoughts were also turning to matters of Jawahar’s
heart. The choice of possible brides was not one to be taken lightly, and Motilal asked
for his son’s opinion in 1909, causing Jawahar to reply, caustically, ‘I am not violently
looking forward to the prospect of being married to anybody.’39 While resisting the idea
of marriage in general, Jawahar did note that his enthusiasm would be far greater if the
bride could be found from outside the Kashmiri Brahmin community. But this was not to
be. Motilal answered legalistically, pointing out that intermarriage between castes was
invalid under Hindu law and, because the British had never legislated to overrule that
point, a free choice was simply not possible.40
Many letters passed between father and son on this theme, and it became increasingly
obvious that Jawahar’s secular upbringing and British veneer were going to make
traditional Hindu matchmaking an awkward business. ‘You express a hope that my
marriage should be romantic’, he wrote to his father. ‘I should like it to be so but I fail to
see how it is going to come about. There is not an atom of romance in the way you are
searching [out] girls for me and keeping them waiting till my arrival. The very idea is
extremely unromantic. And you can hardly expect me to fall in love with a

photograph.’41 But Motilal was not to be put o , and eventually found Kamala Kaul, a
girl from Delhi. Pretty though she was, Jawahar found something to object to in the tenyear age gap between them. ‘I could not possibly marry her before she was eighteen or
nineteen, and that is six or seven years hence’, he wrote. ‘I would not mind waiting as I
am not in a matrimonial state of mind at present.’42
After Cambridge he went to the Inner Temple in London to follow his father into the
legal profession. His studies did not grip him; social and political life did, and two years
went by as Jawahar ‘hovered about London’, becoming interested in Fabianism,
socialism, votes for women and Irish independence. This left-wing awakening was done
in the company of some old public-school friends, and expensively. Motilal had always
been a generous father. At Cambridge, Jawahar had £400 a year, which was almost half
a professorial salary.43 He had proven to be good at spending it, and had often run
short of cash. ‘I was merely trying to ape to some extent the prosperous but somewhat
empty-headed Englishman who is called a “man about town”,’ he later confessed. ‘This
soft and pointless existence, needless to say, did not improve me in any way.’44 Regular
requests for another £100 here and there arrived back in Allahabad; sometimes, there
was just a cable with the single word ‘Money’.45 This occasioned at least one Motilal
fury being delivered in written form; but the debts were always paid. And Jawahar’s
easy life in London was not without its uses. In 1911, Motilal commissioned his son to
purchase for him a full suit of court dress – buckled knee breeches over silk stockings, a
tail coat with gold embroidery, a bicorne hat and a ceremonial sword. Despite his
criticism of the British regime, Motilal was both loyal and important enough to have
been one of the very few Indian commoners commanded to attend the Delhi durbar of
King-Emperor George V.46
*
In the autumn of 1912, a young English gentleman, Jawaharlal Nehru, returned to
India, the land of his birth. He had been away for seven years, punctuated by two trips
home. He had received a world-class education of the grandest type, read plenty of
fashionable books, developed a ra sh interest in radical politics, and spent a large
amount of his father’s money. Nehru’s verdict on himself at age twenty-two was
characteristically sharp: ‘I was a bit of a prig with little to commend me.’47
In India Jawahar duly began to take on legal cases, and was soon delighting his
father with a substantial income. He was interested in politics, but had a crippling fear
of speaking in public – especially if he had to do it in Hindustani, rather than English.48
The rest of his time was divided between the bar library and the club, and featured an
endless rotation of the same old men discussing the same legal topics in the same stu y,
colonial lounges. It was a life of stupefying tedium, and Jawahar quickly fell into
despair. A quote from the paci st Goldsworthy Lowes Dickinson struck him hard: ‘And
why can’t the races meet? Simply because the Indians bore the English.’ Jawahar added,
darkly, ‘It is possible that most Englishmen feel that way and it is not surprising.’49
This glum lad was hardly cheered by the arrival of what was supposed to be the

happiest day of his life on 8 February 1916. The wedding of Jawaharlal Nehru and
Kamala Kaul was one of the leading social events of the year, described later by their
friend Asaf Ali, with very little overstatement, as the ‘royal wedding’.50 It had been
arranged for the rst day of spring. A special train, swagged opulently with ribbons and
bunting and garlanded with owers, brought the groom and three hundred guests up
from Allahabad to Delhi. A town of tents and marquees was set up outside the walled
city, beneath a sign with the words ‘Nehru Wedding Camp’ spelt out in owers. There
were bedroom tents, living-room tents and dining tents, each hung and carpeted with
oriental rugs and furnished with Motilal’s usual lavishness. The encampment had a full
staff and its own orchestra.
Astrologers chose the hour just after midnight as the most favourable for the
ceremony. The groom rode to the Kaul family mansion in Old Delhi on a white horse,
followed by a procession of guests. Jawahar wore a brocade sherwani and silk turban;
Kamala a traditional pink sari. Because Hindu priests usually took the bride’s jewellery
as part of their fee, it was customary for her ornaments to be made of owers – but the
Nehrus were wealthy enough that chains of gold as well as blossom could hang around
Kamala’s slender neck. She was, according to the groom’s second sister, Betty, ‘one of
the most beautiful women I knew or ever have known’.51 Under a canopy, the couple
exchanged vows as the priests chanted and poured ghee into the re, and plumes of
black smoke billowed up into the night sky.
The next day brought more celebrations of an even more sumptuous style back at the
Nehru Wedding Camp. Kamala wore a stunning cream-coloured sari, embroidered with
real pearls, which had taken a group of craftsmen working on the verandahs of Anand
Bhavan several months to bead.52 Motilal had designed the jewellery in which he
bedecked her, so much of it that she seemed to be ‘ablaze’ with diamonds, pearls,
emeralds and rubies.53 A further ten days of rejoicing was declared for the guests, all at
Motilal’s expense.
The only person not enchanted by the festivities was the groom, who looked grumpy
in every photograph. In chapter six of his autobiography, Nehru announced curtly that
‘My marriage took place in 1916 in the city of Delhi.’54 The strange turn of phrase
admitted him no agency: not ‘I married’, but ‘My marriage took place’; he did not name
the bride. Immediately, he moved the subject on to a trip to Kashmir and Ladakh that
summer, a sort of honeymoon en famille. Motilal hired a eet of houseboats on the
picturesque Dal Lake at Srinagar. But a lazy married life did not hold Jawahar’s
attention, and he persuaded his family to trek up into the mountains. Motilal brought
his luxuries with him: the party rode up on horseback, with the frail Swarup Rani carried
in a sedan chair, and took a dozen servants to wait on them in their palatial, woodenfloored tents.
Even this expedition did not satisfy Jawahar’s urge to escape. Leaving Kamala with
his parents, he set o on a perilous climbing adventure to the Zojila Pass with a cousin,
during which he was, to his great excitement, nearly killed when he slipped down a
crevasse.55 The newlyweds were not especially happy in their marriage, which was later
described by their niece Nayantara Sahgal as ‘a grievous mistake for two profoundly

di erent people’. 56 Jawahar, rhapsodizing at elegiac length on the beauty of the
Kashmiri landscape, was clearly not so taken with the charms of his wife; and she, now
living with his parents in a strange half-Westernized household, began to show signs of
distress. Soon after their Kashmiri holiday, Jawahar was called back to Allahabad on
business. Kamala stayed in Kashmir, where she did little but eat cherries and develop
headaches.
The birth of a daughter, Indira, the following year did little to reconcile Jawahar to
family life, for he had at last found a purpose outside it. Mohandas Gandhi had kept a
low pro le since returning to India the previous year, but had caused a scandal and,
nearly, a riot when he spoke freely at the opening of Benares Hindu University in
February 1916. In front of an audience of British and Indian eminences, and a large
number of students who had been angered by the arrest of some of them that day, he
launched into one of the most incendiary speeches he would ever make. ‘I compare with
the richly bedecked noblemen the millions of the poor,’ he said, indicating the former on
the platform behind him. ‘And I feel like saying to these noblemen: “There is no solution
for India unless you strip yourselves of this jewellery and hold it in trust for your
countrymen in India”…. Our salvation can only come through the farmer. Neither the
lawyers, not the doctors, nor the rich landlords are going to secure it.’57 He went on to
discuss violent acts of revolution – in the context of dismissing them, but the audience
missed the subtlety, and heard only the Mahatma talking of the throwing of bombs and
the assassination of viceroys. Several princes walked out, including the chairman, the
Maharaja of Darbhanga. The students were thrilled. The speech brought Gandhi to the
attention of the nation, and to that of Jawaharlal Nehru.58
Few political figures have been so widely misunderstood as Gandhi, in his own time or
today. He emerged at a time when monarchies were falling, and communism loomed; he
was contemporary with Lenin. To many listeners, aware of the march of events in
Russia, Gandhi’s speech sounded like a rallying cry to Indian socialism, with its talk of
the casting o of jewels, and the power of the workers. This was, indeed, the reason
that young radicals like Jawahar were so attracted to him. But a closer examination of
Gandhi’s words reveals something di erent, and much more profoundly religious. He
had confronted the moral behaviour of society, not its structure. Gandhi called for the
princes to stop wearing their nery and instead ‘hold it in trust’ for their subjects. This is
not the same thing at all as telling the masses to rise up and seize it. Gandhi was not
challenging the princes’ right to hold wealth, nor even their right to reign. He was
asking for a change of heart.
Gandhi’s condemnation of princely luxury was part of a much broader preoccupation
with returning India to what he supposed had been a prehistoric ‘golden age’ of
godliness, simplicity and humility.59 He had begun to reject Western ideals of progress
and technology, and insisted that India’s future lay in a return to simple village life, not
industrialization. As a symbol of this, he adopted hand-spinning on a wooden wheel,
and used only khadi – handspun – textiles. He developed a distaste for synthesized drugs
and surgery, which he associated with Western medicine, describing them as ‘black
magic’.60 Doctors, he believed, ‘violate our religious instinct’ by prioritizing the body

over the mind, and curing diseases which people had deserved by their conduct.
Lawyers, meanwhile, had propped up British rule by espousing British law, and were as
‘leeches’ on the people, their profession ‘just as degrading as prostitution’.61 This
position had fuelled continual con ict in his own family life. Unsurprisingly, he was far
from supportive of his sons’ ambitions to pursue careers in medicine or law. ‘I know too
that you have sometimes felt that your education was being neglected’, Mohandas wrote
to his third son, Manilal. But, he contended, ‘Education does not mean a knowledge of
letters but it means character building. It means a knowledge of duty.’62 His eldest son,
Harilal, fared worse. After Mohandas denied him a legal scholarship to London, he ran
away from home, married a woman without his father’s consent, was disinherited, and
ended up unemployed, destitute and bitter. When Manilal tried to lend Harilal money,
Mohandas was so furious that he banished Manilal from his presence for a year. Manilal
ended up sleeping rough on a beach.63
It is not easy being a saint, and it is perhaps even less so to live with one. ‘All of us
brothers have been treated as a ringmaster would treat his trained animals’, Harilal
wrote to his father in the course of a twelve-page letter deploring Mohandas’s treatment
of his wife and sons.64 And yet, to a wider audience beyond his immediate family,
Gandhi’s charisma, determination and fearlessness were inspiring.
At the end of the First World War, India found itself subject to a new onslaught of
oppression. The subcontinent had been heavily taxed, repeatedly hit for loans, and had
given 1.5 million of its men into the service of a distant military e ort. Indian harvests
had been requisitioned to ll European bellies, with the e ect that the bounteous land
that produced them su ered shortages. Four out of every ve British soldiers engaged in
defending the vulnerable North-West Frontier against Afghans and tribal warfare had
been called away to ght for the Allies. As a result, militant pan-Islamic fundamentalists
were able to gain a strong foothold in the Punjab, as well as in Bengal. Across the rest
of India, Hindu nationalism seized the opportunity to capitalize on public discontent.
In March 1915, the Defence of India Act had given the courts extraordinary powers to
detain suspects without trial, and to imprison, deport or execute political agitators in
the Punjab and Bengal. By this stage, even the moderates of the Indian National
Congress began to object. In 1917 Edwin Montagu, the Secretary of State for India,
made a vague pronouncement about the object of British policy being towards the
‘gradual development of self-governing institutions’.65 The reality did not match the
rhetoric.
It is within the context of this tightening of the imperial shackles that the swift and
dazzling rise of Gandhi can be understood. The Indians were a people belittled, starved
and fearful. ‘And then Gandhi came’, wrote Jawaharlal Nehru.
He was like a powerful current of fresh air that made us stretch ourselves and take deep breaths; like a beam of light
that pierced the darkness and removed the scales from our eyes; like a whirlwind that upset many things, but most of
all the working of people’s minds. He did not descend from the top; he seemed to emerge from the millions of India,
speaking their language and incessantly drawing attention to them and their appalling condition.66

Gandhi’s satyagraha was an alternative to fear, an option more radical and, crucially,
more Indian than that proposed by the moderate Congress. His e ect on audiences was
breathtaking. Jawahar’s sister Nan heard him speak in Allahabad. ‘I found myself
struggling to pull o some gold bangles I had on my wrist so that I could put them into
the bag when it came. Afterwards I couldn’t think why I’d been so moved. But he had
this quality of magic about him.’67 His triumphal entry into Congress brought in its wake
great crowds of new supporters: not just Brahmin lawyers, but peasants, farmers and
labourers. He ordered the Brahmin lawyers to the villages, to recruit yet more of the
common people: the e ect was double-sided, for many among them had never truly
seen the poverty of their own countrymen. His arrival changed everything, putting the
upper classes in touch with the lowest and raising the lowest to a new status of nobility.
For the rst time since the Mutiny, India had a widely popular political movement that
rejected the way of life imposed upon it from the distant chambers of London.

CHAPTER 3: CIVIS BRITANNICUS SUM

ON 28 JUNE 1914, AN AUSTRIAN ARCHDUKE AND HIS WIFE were shot in Sarajevo by a nineteen-yearold terrorist. Assassinations were not unusual at the time – victims in recent years had
included the Presidents of Mexico, France and the United States, the Empresses of Korea
and Austria, a Persian Shah, and the Kings of Italy, Greece and Serbia. Portugal had two
kings assassinated on the same day in 1908.1 But the murder of Archduke Franz
Ferdinand would swiftly assume its legendary status as the trigger for the Great War.
Swift to feel its tremors was the fourteen-year-old great-grandson of Queen Victoria, His
Serene Highness Prince Louis of Battenberg.
Prince Louis was born on 24 June 1900, at which point forty-eight people would have
had to die, abdicate, or marry Catholics in order for him to become King of Great Britain
and Ireland, and Emperor of India. He was always known within the family as ‘Dickie’.
Dickie’s father, another Prince Louis of Battenberg, was the First Sea Lord of the Royal
Navy; his mother was Princess Victoria of Hesse, the sister of the Tsarina of Russia. This
made him cousin to almost every king, prince and grand duke in the monkey-puzzle
family tree of European royalty.
The Battenbergs were not especially wealthy, and their provenance placed them
rmly in royalty’s second class.2 (The line had been created by Prince Alexander of
Hesse, who fell in love with and married a countess considered too lowly, and was
summarily demoted by his disgusted family. They had never been keen on him anyway:
Prince Alexander was widely supposed to have been the illegitimate son of his mother’s
chamberlain, Baron Augustus Senarclens von Grancy.3) Still, even a tangential
relationship to royalty proper was a smart thing to have in the early twentieth century,
and the younger Prince Louis enjoyed a fairy-tale childhood touring Europe’s palaces,
and playing with his Russian cousins, Olga, Tatiana, Marie, Anastasia and Alexei. He
was particularly fond of Marie, who was a year his senior, and wondered if he ought to
marry her one day.4 The question would never arise; the First World War would spark a
further cull of royalty and neither the House of Battenberg, nor Grand Duchess Marie,
would survive.
Four months to the day after Franz Ferdinand’s death, the elder Prince Louis of
Battenberg was removed from his position as First Sea Lord. Prince Louis had been
British since 1868, and had served in the Royal Navy since he was fourteen years old.
But by October 1914 Britain was at war with Germany, and there were far too many
Germans visible in high places. For King George V, of the house of Saxe-Coburg Gotha,
the public tide of anti-German feeling was alarming. He was largely German; his wife,
the former Princess May of Teck, was wholly German; his recently deceased father, King
Edward VII, had even spoken English with a strong German accent. It was

uncomfortably obvious where all this might lead, and a highpro le sacri ce was
required to satisfy the public. Prince Louis was at the top of the list.
And so the King and his First Lord of the Admiralty, Winston Churchill, agreed to
throw one of their most senior military experts on to the pyre at the beginning of the
war, because his name was foreign. The Prime Minister, H.H. Asquith, wrote cheerfully
to his con dante Venetia Stanley that ‘our poor blue-eyed German will have to go’.5
There was another reason, too, though it was not discussed openly: both Churchill and
Asquith had lost con dence in Prince Louis’s abilities. No one was honest enough to say
this; Prince Louis was, therefore, asked to resign, and was told to say publicly that he
was doing so out of a patriotic desire not to embarrass the government with his
Germanness.6 Churchill avowed to Prince Louis that, ‘No incident in my public life has
caused me so much sorrow,’ though privately he had been pushing to install his old
friend Lord Fisher in the job for some time.7 Prince Louis maintained great dignity in the
face of this shameful treatment, aside from brie y bursting into tears on the shoulder of
George V.8 He tendered his resignation as requested, and faded away into a private life
of unemployment. For his teenaged son Dickie, a naval cadet at Osborne, the sense of
injustice was devastating. Many years later, he would still describe it as ‘the worst bodyblow I ever su ered’. He was seen standing to attention on his own beside the agpole
at Osborne, weeping.9 ‘It doesn’t really matter,’ he told a friend, when he had calmed
down. ‘Of course I shall take his place.’10
But the humiliation of the Battenbergs was not complete. On 17 July 1917, a mass
rebranding of royalty was ordered by George V. The King led by example this time,
dropping Saxe-Coburg Gotha (which was, in any case, a title – nobody knew what his
surname was, though they suspected without enthusiasm that it might be Wettin or
Wipper), and adopting the British-sounding Windsor. Much against their will, the rest of
the in-laws were de-Germanized. Prince Alexander of Battenberg became the Marquess
of Carisbrooke; Prince Alexander of Teck became the Earl of Athlone; Adolphus, Duke of
Teck, became the Marquess of Cambridge. The unfortunate Princesses of SchleswigHolstein were demoted, in the King’s words, to ‘Helena Victoria and Marie Louise of
Nothing’.11 And the unemployed Prince Louis of Battenberg would be Louis Mountbatten,
Marquess of Milford Haven.
The former Prince Louis detested both his inelegant title and the reasoning behind it.
‘I am absolutely English,’ he told George V. ‘I have been educated in England and have
been in England all my life. If you wish me to become now Sir Louis Battenberg I will do
so.’12 It was a noble o er, dimmed only slightly by Prince Louis’s presumption of a
knighthood – he dismissed the idea of being Mr Louis Battenberg as ‘impossible’ – and
the Teutonic cast of his sentences.13 The compromise was rejected. Henceforth, Prince
Louis would be a marquess, and Battenberg a cake.
But the family’s losses in the Great War were far more devastating than the
misplacement of a little social prestige. Exactly one year to the day after the
Battenbergs became Mountbattens, a massacre took place that would decimate their
family and shock the world beyond. On 2 March 1917, Prince Louis’s brother-in-law Tsar
Nicholas II of Russia had been forced to abdicate. A little over a year later, the ex-Tsar

and his family were moved to the mining town of Ekaterinburg. There they were
incarcerated in a mansion which the Bolsheviks had renamed, with their usual knack for
the ominous, the ‘House of Special Purpose’. That purpose was to become apparent
within just two months. Early on the morning of 17 July 1918, the former imperial
family was ordered into the basement, along with a doctor, a serving-girl, a cook and a
valet. The family and sta were shot, and the survivors, Marie and Anastasia,
repeatedly bayoneted as they screamed and struggled. The Tsarina had made them sew
jewellery into their bodices for safe keeping, and the gemstones de ected both bullets
and blades. The bodies were dragged outside, one of the grand duchesses still wailing
and another choking on blood. The squad was reduced to bludgeoning the girls with the
butts of ri es. The bodies were loaded on to a cart and dumped in an abandoned
mineshaft in the Koptyaki Forest. Shortly afterwards they were retrieved, set on re,
doused in sulphuric acid and buried at the roadside.14
These events haunted the young Lord Louis Mountbatten, as Dickie had been renamed
now that he was the son of a peer, rather than the son of a prince. The teenaged Dickie
took to keeping a portrait of his rst sweetheart, Grand Duchess Marie, beside his bed.
Once in love, Dickie rarely fell out of it, and the portrait of Marie would hang in his
bedroom for the rest of his life.15
Young Dickie’s challenge for the war years was to make his mark in the same Royal
Navy from which his father had been so rudely ejected. Dickie was, from childhood,
adventurous: quick and deft of thought; intrepid, but usually slapdash with it. A school
report from the spring term of 1915 noted that ‘He is very diligent and interested in his
work. At present he is rather inaccurate but I think that his steadiness should soon
overcome this failing.’16
Three distinguishing features of his personality were beginning to emerge. The rst
was a strong streak of romanticism. Aged fourteen, he broke his ankle while
tobogganing and was con ned to bed. He placed an advertisement in a local
newspaper, billing himself accurately, though misleadingly: ‘A young naval o cer,
injured and in hospital, desires correspondence.’ He received 150 replies, many from
women proposing marriage. Always too coy to act the rake, Dickie passed the letters on
to the crew of his brother’s ship, the New Zealand, without answering a single one of
them himself.17
The second feature was a great gift for storytelling, unspoilt by any preoccupation
with the truth. The above tale of capturing 150 swooning, girlish hearts, for instance,
was often told by Mountbatten himself in later life. And yet a search through the local
Dartmouth newspapers from the winter of 1915–16 turns up no such advert, and the
giving-away of the letters means that there is no evidence in the Mountbatten archive,
either. The tale may be true, or it may be ‘rather inaccurate’, but it makes a nice story.
As such it is similar to many of Mountbatten’s favourite anecdotes.
The third, and perhaps the strongest, of Mountbatten’s distinguishing features was a
passion for formality. He adored ceremony, and developed an infatuation with orders
and rank. He would amass an extraordinary collection of decorations: the octagonal
collar of the Royal Victorian Order with its eight gold roses; the Maltese cross of the

Order of St John, with two lions and two unicorns rampant between its points; the
heron- and ostrich-plumed hat and the jewelled strap of the Most Noble Order of the
Garter. Most delightful of all was surely the star and sash of the Most Exalted Order of
the White Elephant. This distinguished Thai order was founded in 1861 by King
Mongkut Rama IV, perhaps better known to Westerners in ctionalized form as the hero
of Rodgers and Hammerstein’s musical The King and I. But the Order of the White
Elephant is no ction, and at his country house, Broadlands, Dickie’s still hangs proudly
on its pink sash.18
Springing from a long line of royal sticklers, fussers and pedants, Mountbatten had
been bred for pageantry. It was a good thing, for he seemed not to have been bred for
the navy. A fellow o cer later admitted that Mountbatten ‘knew nothing about the sea
at all; he went into the Navy because it was in his family rather than in his blood.’19
One of his instructors reported that Mountbatten was slower than the average cadet,
and that he would only ever keep up by hard work. Fortunately, Mountbatten had an
insatiable appetite for hard work, and a burning ambition which would both literally
and guratively keep his head above water. At the age of eighteen, he had been made
second-in-command of his rst ship, a patrol vessel called HMS P31. His greatest
achievement was to have it moored at Westminster and visited by King George V and
Princess Mary – an event which set the tone for his career, in which the stage-managing
of publicity coups would be paramount.20
In 1919, Dickie was released from the Navy to go to Cambridge, where he
matriculated at Christ’s College. Entrance to the two most hallowed of English
universities in those days had little to do with academic merit, and a lot to do with
connections and money. The intensely anti-intellectual Prince of Wales, Prince Edward
(‘David’), had already been through Magdalen College, Oxford, where he found it
necessary to keep his private tutor with him at all times. His younger brother Prince
Albert (‘Bertie’), who had been placed sixty-eighth out of sixty-eight in his nal
examinations at Osborne, was at Trinity College, Cambridge. Another brother, Prince
Henry, was so profoundly dim of wit that even the royals themselves looked down on
him (David was said to have remarked that the only reason ‘poor Harry’ recognized the
National Anthem was because everybody stood up). He was about to start alongside his
brother at Trinity. Unfortunately the royal family viewed education with the same
suspicion with which a villageful of medieval peasants viewed witchcraft. The King
refused to let Bertie and Harry live among their college peers. Instead he put them up at
Southacre, a large house which was a good distance out of town, and consequently the
shy Bertie made no friends at all, while Harry spent most of his university career setting
up mousetraps in the conservatory. The young princes were fortunate in having one
person who could provide a link to the distant social whirl of undergraduate life – their
cousin, Dickie Mountbatten.
Being at Cambridge at the same time as the princes was a stroke of luck for Dickie.
The Empire, though at its largest ever extent, had been troubled by the war. There was
an opportunity at the heart of the royal family for someone with an instinctive feel for
public relations, someone who could stand as a great British hero, steady the national

identity, and move the throne forwards into a new democratic age. It was widely
assumed that this would be the enormously popular golden boy, David, who would one
day reign as Edward VIII. But, as royal families have long learned, it is no bad thing to
have a spare besides an heir. By moving into the close cabal that surrounded the royal
family, Dickie was moving closer towards ful lling his own ambition: to restore his
family to the very top of British public life.
Even before the war, the British Empire had been modifying its relationship with its
colonies. Four of its great territories – Australia, New Zealand, South Africa and Canada
– now held ‘dominion status’, allowing them a measure of self-government. It was
incongruous that India remained a mere colony. The incongruity was enhanced by the
fact that India had provided wartime supplies of food and soldiers, the latter widely
recruited by Mohandas Gandhi, who still professed that those who wished for rights must
act like they deserved them. But the British government in India appeared to be moving
towards greater control. In February 1919, it introduced the Rowlatt Bills, two pieces of
anti-terrorist legislation which were intended to reinforce the totalitarian powers that
had been granted to the judiciary in wartime. Gandhi saw these bills as an open
challenge. On 18 March 1919, the Imperial Legislative Council forced the Rowlatt Act
into law, despite the opposition of every Indian member. Three weeks later, on 6 April,
Gandhi called a hartal – a day of prayer and fasting that e ectively functioned as a
general strike. It was the rst major nationwide and interfaith protest against the
British government since the Mutiny. Some protesters became so incensed that the nonviolent character of the hartal was forgotten, and riots broke out. The British grew
frantic, and far-fetched rumours spread among the troops. British soldiers heard that
Gandhi himself had sponsored circulars inciting Indian patriots to murder European men
and ravish European women.21 Gandhi had done nothing of the sort. On the contrary,
he condemned his followers’ heated behaviour.22
But the most signi cant incident, which would change the whole course of British
imperial history, was to take place in Amritsar, north of Delhi. On 10 April 1919, two
Indian leaders who had been organizing the hartals were arrested. In consequence, there
was a massive riot. Forty thousand people ran amok in the city, pillaging and burning
buildings, and killing ve white men as well as seriously injuring two women. The next
morning, Brigadier General Reginald Dyer arrived from Jullundur to take command of
the scorched city.
Dyer had served in the eastern Empire for over thirty years. He was known for his
short fuse, but maintained an excellent rapport with the Indian soldiers under his
command.23 On assuming command in Amritsar, he issued a proclamation warning that
gatherings would be red on. ‘Respectable persons,’ it warned, ‘should stay indoors.’24
By the morning of 13 April, the proclamation was being disobeyed, though not for
nefarious purposes. That day happened to be a Sikh festival, Baisakhi Day, which was
also celebrated by Hindus as the rst day of harvest. Dyer sent his troops on to the
streets to repeat the proclamation in Urdu and Punjabi, and added a curfew to the

ordinances. Owing to the intense heat, and the small number of soldiers available, few
citizens had any chance of hearing the proclamation. Many of them ran to hide at the
first sight of British troops.25
At four o’clock that afternoon, Dyer received reports that a meeting was taking place
in Jallianwala Bagh. The Bagh was an area of enclosed scrubland with only three
narrow exits – one of which had been closed up. As usual on a Sunday afternoon, it was
full of people. Hundreds used the Bagh as a social meeting place every day, and the
crowd was swelled to thousands by out-of-town families who had come in for the
festival. In one corner was the political meeting that had so outraged Dyer. A wooden
platform had been set up near a well, and various poets and activists were speaking to
the crowd.
Just before 5.15 p.m., Dyer arrived with 100 Gurkha, Sikh, Pathan and Baluchi
ri emen, and 40 more Gurkhas armed with knives. 26 He stopped outside one of the two
open exits, and sent a man in to estimate the size of the crowd – 5000, the report came
back. Later estimates suggested it must have been between three and ten times that
gure. The troops marched in and set up their ri es. Dyer’s instructions were speci c:
aim straight and low, re at the fullest part of the crowd, and pick o any stragglers
who try to escape. No warning was given before the troops opened fire.
The gathering, though technically illegal, had been peaceful until Dyer showed up. At
his order, 1650 bullets were red into the throng of men, women and children. Soldiers
deliberately blocked the exits, trapping people in the killing ground. In desperation,
they clawed their way up the walls, scrambled over their injured friends, and leapt
down the open well, which lled with 120 bodies drowning and su ocating in water
thick with blood. The slaughter went on until the ammunition was spent. O cial
estimates put the death toll at 379, with at least 1200 more injured. Popular estimates
went much higher. Many of the victims were too scared to seek medical assistance from
the British hospitals, and the curfew prevented families from searching for their dead.27
Dyer showed no remorse in the aftermath of his massacre. Instead, he had high-caste
Indians whom he suspected of political agitation rounded up and publicly ogged. Any
Indian who dared approach the street where a Christian missionary had been dragged
off her bicycle was forced to crawl face-down in the dirt.
Dyer’s action had been vicious, decisive and unforgettable, and would polarize
political opinion across the Empire. Strict military censorship slowed the spread of
news, but so shocking a tale could not stay secret for long. By 30 May, it had reached
Bengal. The national poet, Rabindranath Tagore, immediately resigned his knighthood.
‘The time has come when the badges of honour make our shame glaring in the
incongruous context of humiliation,’ he explained to the Viceroy.28 Motilal Nehru wrote
that, ‘My blood is boiling’, causing his daughter Betty to add that, ‘If his blood was in
that condition, my brother [Jawahar]’s was like superheated steam.’29 Amritsar was the
most in uential single incident in the radicalization of Congress, and in the
radicalization of the Nehrus.30
More surprising, perhaps, was the great upsurge in popular backing for Dyer. ‘I
thought I would be doing a jolly lot of good,’ said the man himself, and there was no

shortage of people who agreed with him.31 The House of Lords passed a motion in his
support. The Morning Post newspaper started a drive to raise funds for his retirement;
£26,000 was collected, from members of the public and celebrities, including Rudyard
Kipling, and the Duke of Somerset. When Sir Edwin Montagu rose in Parliament to
condemn Dyer for terrorism and racial humiliation of the Indians, he was shouted down
by Conservative members crying, ‘It saved a mutiny,’ accusing him of Bolshevism, and
screaming anti-Semitic insults. The session nearly turned into a physical ght.32 Even
among Indians there was support for Dyer. The Sikh leaders in Amritsar made him an
honorary Sikh, staging a special ceremony in their holiest site, the Golden Temple.33
But perhaps the most surprising response of all came from Mohandas Gandhi, the
leader of the formerly peaceful campaign which had ended in such carnage. On 18
April, newspapers printed a letter from Gandhi expressing regret for the civil
disobedience campaign. ‘I am sorry, when I embarked on a mass movement, I
underrated the forces of evil’, he wrote, ‘and I must now pause and consider how best to
meet the situation.’34 Discussing the victims of Dyer’s massacre, he declared that they
‘were de nitely not heroic martyrs’, and criticized them for having ‘taken to their heels’
rather than face death calmly.35 He continued to profess that he believed the British
would see justice done.36 Gandhi had fought for the British Empire for the entirety of his
adult life. He believed in it; what he wanted for the Indian people was that they be
recognized and treated as full subjects, and that they act in a way to deserve such an
honour.
The plea against arbitrary justice in the Roman Empire, as famously invoked by St
Paul at Philippi, was ‘Civis Romanus sum’ – I am a Roman citizen. Many years later, the
Indian writer Nirad Chaudhuri converted this to ‘Civis Britannicus sum’ – I am a British
citizen. Chaudhuri was widely seen in post-imperial India as being an apologist for
British rule, but in fact he was making a point no di erent from Gandhi’s in 1919. It
was an appeal for inclusion within the British imperial family; a sentiment young Dickie
Battenberg, estranged by his German name, would have felt as he saluted the Union
Jack at Osborne with tears of humiliation rolling down his cheeks.37
The Hunter Commission was set up on 14 October 1919 to inquire into the massacre
and other disorders in Bombay, Delhi and the Punjab. It took ve months to conclude
that Dyer had been in the wrong. Congress ran its own inquiry into events, with young
Jawaharlal Nehru sent to inspect the Bagh and take evidence. Later that year, Jawahar
got on the night train to Delhi at Amritsar. It was full, and he crept into the only upper
berth that was not occupied by a sleeping body. Only the next morning did he realize
that he was travelling in a carriage full of loud, blustering o cers of the Indian Army.
The loudest and most blustering among them was Brigadier General Dyer himself,
bragging of his exploits at Amritsar. ‘He pointed out how he had the whole town at his
mercy and he had felt like reducing the rebellious city to a heap of ashes, but he took
pity on it and refrained,’ Jawahar remembered. ‘I was greatly shocked to hear his
conversation and to observe his callous manner. He descended at Delhi station in
pyjamas with bright pink stripes, and a dressing-gown.’38
Dyer was asked to resign from the army. He escaped prosecution and lived out his

remaining years quietly in Bristol. Gandhi was eventually moved from his patriotic
position with great di culty, having given the British administration every opportunity
to prove itself responsive. Had the British at this point allowed moderate concessions,
the following years might have been a great deal easier for them as well as for their
king’s Indian subjects. Unfortunately, they did nothing. Fourteen months after Tagore
had resigned his knighthood, Gandhi belatedly returned to the Viceroy his Kaiser-i-Hind
medal. He declared his rst national satyagraha campaign, and he and Congress
declared themselves in favour of swaraj – meaning self-rule, de ned as ‘political and
spiritual’ independence.39
In London, it was felt that the reputation of the Empire had taken a serious knock.
King George V had sensibly issued a pardon for all those involved in the Punjab rioting
just before Congress opened its session of December 1919. The Congress president,
Motilal Nehru, joined Gandhi in sending grateful thanks to the King ‘for his act of
mercy’.40 In reality, the act had been pragmatic. The Empire’s image needed a boost,
and the energies of its subjects needed to be refocused on patriotic pride. The
government hit upon a simple solution. The King’s son David, Prince of Wales, was
young, handsome and popular. Though he spent all of his free time in nightclubs
dancing with other men’s wives and moaning about his royal burden, the press
obediently presented him as a clean-cut young soldier hero and the most eligible
bachelor in Europe. He was the ideal ‘face’ of the British Empire – and so he would be
sent to tour his future domain. This would serve a triple purpose. First, David could act
as an ambassador for British rule. Second, he could learn about the many lands and
peoples that would one day be subject to him. And, third, it would get him away from
his debauched Mayfair set – not least his unsuitable girlfriend Freda Dudley-Ward, who
was married to someone else.
David’s cousin Dickie Mountbatten was not really a member of that set, being slightly
too young and too gauche to join in. But his carefully nurtured friendships with David’s
less glamorous brothers Bertie and Harry had brought him to the inner circle of royal
life. One night, David was talking about his trips abroad at a Buckingham Palace
dinner, and suggested to the rapt Dickie that he should come along as his aide-de-camp.
The process of inspecting his future Empire, and letting it inspect him, was to prove
tiresome to the Prince of Wales. David was lonely on HMS Renown. The only people he
considered to be friends were Dickie and an equerry called Piers Legh. ‘Dickie is keen &
cheery about everything, though of course he is such a baby!!’ the prince wrote to Mrs
Dudley-Ward on the day after he sailed from Portsmouth, 17 March 1920. ‘But he’s a
vewy clever boy & goes out of his way to be nice & kind & sympathetic & attentive to
me as I think he guesses a little how I’m feeling. I’m so glad I’ve got him with me & I
think we are going to be great friends.’41
The cousins did indeed become great friends, and quickly. Dickie was the only person
the prince saw during his long cruises around the world to whom he could relate on
equal terms and, conspicuously, the only person aboard ship who could call the prince
‘David’, rather than ‘Sir’. The two men shared the same sense of humour, so common
among royalty, centred around practical jokes. And they were both lovesick: David for

Mrs Dudley-Ward, and Dickie, apparently, for a new girl each week. ‘Dickie has been
sitting in my cabin for 1/2 hr while I undressed & has told me all his “love a airs” as he
calls them!!’ the prince wrote to Mrs Dudley-Ward. ‘He makes me laugh, sweetie,
particularly when he mentions the word love!!’42 Dickie had been pining for an
Englishwoman, Audrey James, to whom he was tentatively engaged following a dogged
pursuit – but she would chuck him on his return, and absence did not appear to be
making his heart grow fonder, either. On tour, he irted with all the cheerful abandon
of one let o the leash, and delighted in dancing and playing Ludo with ‘a lot of pretty
girls’.43
The tour’s rst destination was Barbados (‘I haven’t landed yet sweetheart but it looks
a proper bum island this Barbados,’ David con ded to Mrs Dudley-Ward)44, and it was
there that the standard for the trip was set. David spent the days moping about in
between ponderous ceremonials and formal parties, while Dickie plied him with
horseplay and dancing partners in an attempt to lighten things up. The two men soon
found themselves riding together, drinking together, going to parties together, learning
to surf together, sleeping on deck with their beds pushed together, and even, one hot
afternoon in Fiji, bathing together. ‘Plenty of room for two!!’ David exclaimed as he and
Dickie threw themselves into a tiled pool at Government House and ordered reviving
cocktails.45 (Back in Britain, the King was not impressed. ‘You and Dick in a swimming
pool together is hardly digni ed, though comfortable in a hot climate, you might as well
be photographed naked, no doubt it would please the public,’ he wrote acidly.)46 Most
of all, they joked together. They tied up o cers and dunked them in a bath. They
attempted to train David’s pet wallaby, Digger, to perform tricks. They ooded
bathrooms. They raided gentlemen’s cloakrooms, and dressed up in silly out ts: ‘Dickie
& I found some of our host’s clothes & opera hats & tennis boots in his room (he was
away) & we dolled ourselves up & made everybody laugh too which was so amazing!
But as you can guess my beloved my mild hilarity was merely due to some very good
brown sherry His Ex gave us for dinner though I wasn’t in any way toxi-boo.’47
The rest of the crew began to nd this pair ever more insu erable, even when they
were not toxi-boo, and their resentment tended to focus on Dickie. Even the otherwise
loyal Piers Legh started to refer to the prince’s cousin as ‘Dirty Dick’ and ‘the Hun’ in
letters home.48 By 18 April, the situation had reached crisis point. A deputation from the
sta went to the Admiral with a lengthy list of Dirty Dick’s many transgressions. The
Admiral duly gave him a talking-to, though, as his crimes amounted to little more than
having an annoying personality, it is hard to imagine what he might have done about
them. David was distraught, and attributed the crew’s complaints to jealousy. He began
to worry about what the crew would say about his new best friend once they were back.
‘I don’t want my “little brother” Dickie badly spoken of at home!!’ he declared. ‘I’m so
fond of that boy & he means so much to me when I’m away from TOI, far more than
Bertie ever has or ever will.’49
By the time the tour arrived back in Portsmouth on 11 October 1920, Dickie
Mountbatten’s social climb was complete. He was now, without doubt, the closest friend

of the Prince of Wales and future king – closer even than the prince’s own brother.
David and Dickie’s next and most important challenge was already set up. They were to
be sent to conquer India.

CHAPTER 4: DREAMING OF THE EAST

, THE PRINCE OF WALES WROTE TO HIS LOVER Freda Dudley-Ward about his planned trip to
ON 29 JUNE 1920
India the following year. ‘I’m intent on Dickie coming again!!’ he wrote. ‘I just couldn’t
do without that boy on the next trip & the Admiral likes him & wants him too & it won’t
harm his naval career, in fact he’ll bene t by it!!’1 When he looked back over his royal
career thirty years later, David’s enthusiasm for cousin Dickie was not so obvious;
though the in uence of his ghost-writer was. ‘It was my impression at the time that his
interest in the manifold problems of India was con ned to that part of the country
bounded by the white boards of polo elds,’ he mused, with the haughtiness that only
the pot can muster for the kettle. ‘However, not so many years were to elapse before he
was to be established in the Viceroy’s House at New Delhi, engaged in the process of
liquidating the immeasurable Imperial trust he and I, each in our own way, had
endeavoured to defend in our youth.’2
The peak of the British Empire’s extent and in uence is often said to have been in the
early 1920s, and thoughts of it ending at that time were widely considered to be absurd.
The New York Times had stated boldly on 10 July 1921 that ‘British imperialism would
be compelled to evacuate Great Britain itself before it would willingly evacuate India’,3
sentiments with which the future King-Emperor and his retinue would doubtless have
agreed. Perhaps they did not realize how close the imperial trust was to being liquidated
– without their consent.
On 26 October 1921, Dickie and David left Portsmouth on the battlecruiser HMS
Renown. On 12 November, they came ashore at Aden on the south coast of Arabia, the
westernmost British colony ruled from Delhi. The pair of them drove past large
gatherings of black spectators hemmed in by the occasional white man in a pith helmet.
Union Jacks uttered in the sky, and a huge banner was unfurled. It addressed the
Prince of Wales with a loyal exhortation: ‘Tell Daddy we are all happy under British
rule’. And it was from this acceptably loyal outpost of his future empire that David
embarked finally for the Jewel itself.
For months, the pages of English-language newspapers in India had lled up with
advertisements selling printed portraits of the prince for two rupees, and advising ladies
to purchase abundant wardrobes of new gowns for the myriad social events during his
stay. But the greater part of the excitement was generated by fear: a very real fear that
Gandhi’s call for ‘civil revolution’ might explode into a revolution of the more usual,
uncivil type.4 If anything were to happen to the Prince of Wales while he was in India,
the consequences would be unthinkable. As the Renown drew closer to Bombay across
the Arabian Sea, the British administrators, and the media, seemed to hold their breath.
The prince set foot in his future imperial domain at 10.20 in the morning of 17

November 1921 at Bombay. A royal barge ferried him from the Renown across the silver
waves to the half- nished, roseate arches of the Gateway of India. He emerged from his
barge, a slight, golden-haired gure in a neat white naval uniform, amid clouds of spent
gunpowder from the massive salute a orded him by the eet of British warships
anchored just o shore. Preceded by three chaprasis clad in scarlet, the prince progressed
to a garlanded pavilion on the quay. There he inspected the guards of honour, and sat
on a gilded throne to read out King George V’s message to the Indian Empire. That
done, he was put into a state carriage, and drawn by four horses to Government House
for a formal luncheon.5 The Times of India estimated that 200,000 people lined the route
between Apollo Bunder and Sandhurst Road.
The prince’s itinerary had been planned according to long-established royal tradition.
He was to progress around India attending interminable parties, opening buildings,
killing as much wildlife as possible and only interacting with the common people by
waving at them from a parade. The sentiments of the royal party were made plain in
the booklet of Hindustani phrases produced by Dickie and Sir Geo rey de Montmorency,
and circulated on board HMS Renown. It comprised a list of basic numbers and verbs,
plus a few everyday expressions. These included:
Ghoosul teeyar kurro – Make ready the bath
Yeh boot sarf kurro – Make clean these boots
Peg do – Give me a whisky and soda
Ghora lao – Bring round the horse
Yeh miler hai; leyjao – This is dirty; take it away
Tum Kootch Angrezi bolte hai? – Do you speak any English?
Mai neigh sumujhta – I don’t understand
The words for ‘please’ and ‘thank you’ are nowhere to be found.6
So far, it seemed, so good. But a smooth disembarkation could not allay fears that the
prince’s four-month tour would end in disaster – and the probable culprit was obvious.
Gandhi, according to the prince, ‘was regarded as a sinister if somewhat ludicrous
gure’ in government circles. This was perhaps an understatement. The year before,
Winston Churchill had astonished a dinner party by suggesting that he have Gandhi
bound hand and foot at the gates of Delhi, and let the Viceroy sit on the back of a giant
elephant and trample the Mahatma into the dirt.7 Most of the government kept their
opinions rather less forthright, and the prevailing mood appears to have been
trepidation rather than vengeance. ‘Would he try to spoil my show?’ asked the prince.8
In fact, Gandhi was just as concerned by the possibility of mob violence as were the
British. He called for a hartal to mark the prince’s arrival in Bombay, but speci cally
and repeatedly stated that it should be peaceful and dignified.9
But Gandhi’s hold over the masses was feebler than his reputation suggested. As the
prince sat down for his luncheon and the crowds that had greeted him dispersed,
celebration turned swiftly to anger. The e ect was immediate and terrifying, as the city
which had looked so serene only an hour before erupted in violence. ‘From Government

House, one could hear the sounds of distant rioting and occasional shots,’ the prince
noted.10 For once, Hindus and Muslims were united, as both ganged up on Parsi and
Indian Christian communities. Shops were looted. Tram cars were pelted with stones.
The police station at New Nagpada was set upon, and three Indian constables were
brutally murdered by a howling mob.11 Meanwhile, the royal tour attempted to continue
as normal, and the shaken prince was taken to watch some polo at the Willingdon Club.
He then returned to Government House for a reception in a very stu y room, at which
he had to shake hands with three thousand people while attempting not to perspire too
noticeably. (One guest at the reception was so struck by the frequency with which the
prince mopped his reddened brow that he wrote a letter to the Times of India
complaining about it.)12
Gandhi appealed for an end to the carnage. ‘The Swaraj that I have witnessed during
the last two days has stunk in my nostrils,’ he wrote. ‘I invite every Hindu and
Mussalman to retire to his home and ask God for forgiveness and to befriend the injured
communities from the bottom of their hearts.’13 The Mahatma’s words did little to calm
the situation. By the time that the prince returned to Bombay the following week,
several parts of the city had been devastated. A mob had set re to a barrel of alcohol at
the Null Bazaar and burnt the whole building down, causing damage estimated at
100,000 rupees. Errant Gandhians had smashed up liquor shops, and one such
establishment had been raided by a marauding band of Pathans. A group of Parsis had
attacked a motorcar and forced the Hindu occupants to remove their Gandhi caps. The
Hindus ed, leaving the Parsis to tear the car to pieces. Amid reports of attacks on
anyone wearing Western dress, seven Europeans were admitted to the General Hospital
with injuries over the weekend, and one was killed. The o cial estimated death toll
stood at 36, with between 150 and 200 more lying injured in hospital.14
With both Gandhi and the British authorities railing against the masses, the prince
was packed o on his train, heading north towards the deserts of Rajputana. In
Bombay, the people had looked poor, the city dirty and crowded, and the atmosphere
bleak. In Baroda, the opposite of each of these was true. The prince was greeted with six
garlanded elephants, bearing jewelled silver howdahs; a line of silver carriages, drawn
by caparisoned oxen with gilded horns; and rows upon rows of plumed horses ridden by
Baroda’s state guard. He was driven through vast crowds of people, said to comprise the
entire population of the state, to the Nazar Bagh palace. The prince walked on a carpet
of cloth-of-gold all the way from his carriage up a magni cent ight of stairs to a hall
with a silver sofa, where he and the Gaekwar of Baroda held court for the local
dignitaries.15
The Indian states would have many more chances to impress the disoriented Prince of
Wales as he travelled on through Udaipur to the extraordinary blue-painted town of
Jodhpur. It was there, on 30 November 1921, that the prince got to stick his rst pig on
a dawn hunt, and then his second soon afterwards. The ladies of the party, spectating
from towers built at the edge of the open ground, were disappointed that he stuck both
of his pigs out of sight in the jungle. They had to be content with listening to a ‘piercing
and long-drawn squeal’ from deep in the undergrowth, the cry of a beast skewered by a

princely spear.16
David enjoyed pig-sticking so much that he and Dickie went again the next day. This
time, Dickie’s luck was in. ‘It was one of the best mornings I have ever spent anywhere,’
he wrote e usively in his diary. 17 Unwary researchers in the Mountbatten archive may
still shake out an envelope bearing the emblem of the Maharaja of Jodhpur, and be
confronted by a decaying, matted lump of hair and skin. It is proudly labelled: ‘Tip of
tail of Boar speared by me at Jodhpur 1st Dec 1921 – D’.18
If the elephants at Baroda had impressed the prince, the welcome at Bikaner would
astound him. For two miles before the palace of Lalgarh, the road was lined with
thousands of steeds of the Ganga Rissala Bikaner Camel Corps, bearing the sumptuously
robed and jewelled nobility of the state. The prince spent an arduous day inspecting Boy
Scouts and, that night, he and Dickie saw an elaborate programme of entertainment at
the Junagarh Fort. The inner court was lit with thousands of coloured fairy lights, which
were dramatically extinguished as fourteen exquisite nautch girls appeared, bearing lit
candelabra on their heads. Dickie burnt himself while inspecting a piece of glowing
charcoal that a performer had held in his mouth during a re-dance. Another performer
danced barefoot upon swords, spear-points, saws, and a heap of delicate shells which he
left perfectly unbroken.19
It would have been easy for the Prince of Wales to forget about the nightmare he had
glimpsed brie y in Bombay – that is, until he got to the United Provinces. The
provinces, in the north-east of India between Delhi and the Himalayas, were one of
India’s most politically sophisticated regions. This was the home territory of the Nehru
family, and would be the scene of the best-organized protests against the prince’s visit.
The royal party rst arrived in Lucknow on 9 December. It was a destination with
particular resonance, having withstood two lengthy sieges by rebel sepoys during the
Mutiny. The prince gamely joined in a polo match, and was allowed to win; the Raja of
Jahangirabad presented him with the cup.20 But, beyond the white boards of that
particular polo eld, support for the tour was proving hard to drum up. The royal party
blamed Gandhi personally for a range of dirty tricks which they believed had been
employed to keep the crowds away. It was said that Congressmen had told the people
that they would be shot by police if they went too near the prince’s procession; further,
that the prince had been so horri ed by India’s poverty that he had poisoned the
customary free food, in order to e ect a mass cull of the poor. 21 Such rumours may have
been spread, but not by Gandhi. He went in for far more straightforward persuasion.
Meanwhile, David was tickled to see trucks driving around Lucknow painted with the
slogan ‘Come and see the Prince and have a free ride’. It was, he admitted, ‘a form of
enticement that never had to be employed when my father travelled about India’.22
That night, David was encouraged to dance away his woes at Government House. ‘I
am afraid that I prefer native states to British India,’ Dickie complained,23 but the
evidence suggests that he had a good time – his card for the evening reveals that he
danced with so many new girls that he could not remember all their names. There was a
foxtrot with ‘Red Ostrich Feather’, a one-step with ‘Pink Gray Stockings’, and two more
foxtrots with ‘Miss Slim Ankles’.24 Despite appearances, though, the girl-crazy days of

1920 were behind him. Miss Slim Ankles was destined for disappointment, for he had
been writing to the Hon. Edwina Ashley all tour.
Edwina Ashley was a year younger than Dickie Mountbatten. Her maternal
grandfather was Sir Ernest Cassel, an enormously successful banker and close friend of
King Edward VII – who had stood as her godfather and after whom she had been
named.25 Sir Ernest bequeathed to his rst granddaughter the greatest portion of his
estate. This included properties in Mayfair, Bournemouth, Newmarket and Switzerland;
a considerable collection of art treasures and valuable furnishings; and a trust fund
worth something close to £3 million (equivalent to over £100 million today). From her
father’s side, Edwina would ultimately inherit even more money, along with the estates
of Broadlands in Hampshire, and Classiebawn in Sligo. It was from that side that she
also inherited a colourful family tree, ranging from Prime Ministers Melbourne and
Palmerston to the Algonquin princess Pocahontas.
Despite all this gilding, Edwina had endured an austere and lonely childhood. Her
mother had died in 1911, after which her father, Lord Mount Temple, had taken a new
wife – described later by Dickie as ‘a wicked woman, a real bitch’.26 Because Edwina
and her sister could not get on with their stepmother, they were doomed to a youth of
freezing showers and endless lacrosse at a hearty girls’ boarding school in Eastbourne.
Edwina was bullied on account of her grandfather being rich, German and Jewish, and
later described school as ‘sheer hell’.27 She was afterwards subjected to an internment at
a domestic science college in Su olk, where wealthy young ladies had to wear mob-caps
and long green overalls while learning to cook, clean and sew. These privileged girls
would never be expected to use their accomplishments in a vocational context: they
were being taught how to supervise their future sta , and instilled with a suitably souldestroying sense of ‘traditional’ femininity.28 Edwina kept writing to Sir Ernest about
how unhappy she was. Finally, after six months of button-sewing, table-laying and
learning to comport herself, she was rescued by him and packed o to travel round
France and Italy. Edwina was to have a grand tour, seeing for herself the art, culture
and society of Europe, under the watchful eye of Jane Cranston, a chaperone who was
under strict instructions not to let Edwina attend evening parties or befriend bachelors.
But Miss Cranston would soon nd that her pretty young charge had already had
enough propriety to last her a lifetime. Edwina’s photograph albums from the trip
juxtapose a few improving classical ruins with a lot of brooding young men in welltailored breeches.29
Dickie and Edwina had met in October 1920, at a dance given by Mrs Cornelius
Vanderbilt at Claridge’s Hotel in London.30 They met again at Cowes during the Regatta
Week of 1921, when the keener-eyed society doyennes noticed the pair dancing together
every night. Mrs Vanderbilt was among those doyennes, and invited them both on a tenday cruise around Belgium and France on the Vanderbilt yacht. Edwina had several
suitors, but Dickie was trying so hard to get her attention she could hardly fail to notice.
One evening they slipped away from their maids to dance at a seaside cafe called the
Omar Khayyam. On their last night, Dickie seized an opportunity o ered by Edwina’s
seasickness, convincing her that the way to conquer it was to sleep on deck in a lifeboat

in which, so it happened, he too would be spending the night.31
After they returned home, Dickie invited Edwina to meet his parents. Shortly
afterwards, the new couple went on another holiday in Scotland, with various friends
including Dickie’s princely cousins, David and Bertie. Dickie had been on the verge of
proposing to Edwina when he received a severe shock. A telegram arrived with the
unexpected news that his father had died following a heart attack. Dickie hastened back
to his family. Days later, Edwina returned to London to comfort him. She had meant to
go straight to Brook House to tell her grandfather and guardian, Sir Ernest Cassel, about
her new boyfriend. On getting o the train, she discovered that she was a few hours too
late. Cassel, too, had just died of a heart attack, as unexpectedly as had the Marquess of
Milford Haven.32
Under such circumstances, the blossoming romance deepened. When Dickie sailed for
India with David, Edwina had been photographed standing on the quay between
Dickie’s sister Louise and David’s brother Bertie, a soulful expression on her face.33
Later, Dickie had pressed Edwina to join him. ‘I need you so badly’, he wrote to her.
‘You just don’t know what a di erence your coming out to India is going to make.’ 34
Unable yet to access her grandfather’s estate, Edwina borrowed £100 from her greataunt for a second-class berth, and studied the passenger lists until she found the name of
a vague acquaintance she could ask to act as her chaperone. A long, hot journey
followed, through the Mediterranean and the Red Sea: ‘I just lay on my bunk with the
ceiling fan slowly turning, and dreamed of the East,’ she remembered.
As Edwina sailed towards Bombay, her beau moved on with the Prince of Wales to the
troublesome city of Allahabad. For those on the tour, any remaining dreams of eastern
promise were to be rudely interrupted. Here, the peaceful protest was to reach its zenith
– despite the local magistrate’s e orts to keep the ringleaders caged by arresting Motilal
Nehru and his thirty-two-year-old son, Jawahar.
Since the days of being ‘a bit of a prig’, Jawahar had undergone a political epiphany.
A group of peasants had come to Allahabad to beg the leaders of the freedom movement
to take up their case against cruel and oppressive landlords. Jawahar agreed to visit
their village and discuss their concerns. This three-day trip had transformed him from a
shy and cosseted lawyer – who, by his own admission, was ‘totally ignorant’ of the
conditions in which the great majority of Indians worked and lived – into a
revolutionary. ‘Looking at them and their misery and over owing gratitude, I was lled
with shame and sorrow,’ he wrote; ‘shame at my own easygoing and comfortable life
and our petty politics of the city which ignored this vast multitude of semi-naked sons
and daughters of India, sorrow at the degradation and overwhelming poverty.’35
By the time of the Prince of Wales’s tour, Jawahar had been con rmed as a rising star
of the freedom movement, and one more radical than his august father. Motilal had
been opposed to satyagraha in the rst instance, and argued that the sending of a few
individuals to prison would make little di erence. In particular, he was unhappy with
the thought of Jawahar ending up there. A doting father does not send his only beloved
son to Harrow and Cambridge in the expectation that he will end up in a jailhouse. Yet
Jawahar was determined to pursue satyagraha. Though even Gandhi advised him to do

nothing that would upset Motilal, he could not be dissuaded. Father and son argued for
several days. Jawahar pointedly began to eat bread and milk in the evenings from a
steel bowl, amid the rest of the family’s crystal and Dresden china. Before one dinner he
was ddling with a piece of twine from a parcel, and commented: ‘I wonder what it
feels like to have a noose round one’s neck?’ Swarup Rani nearly fainted; Motilal
walked out and slammed the door. ‘Has this family no sense of humour left?’ asked
Jawahar, crossly.36 That night, Motilal secretly tried sleeping on the oor, wanting to
understand the hardship his son would suffer in prison.37
On the evening of 6 December 1921, the Prince of Wales was in his train en route for
Bharatpur. That same night, Jawahar was up late in the Congress o ce in Allahabad,
when a clerk burst in with the news that they were surrounded by police and that the
building was being searched. Jawahar maintained his cool – ‘it was my rst experience
of the kind, but the desire to show o was strong,’ he later admitted. He refused to
inch while the police went around tipping out les and arresting his colleagues.
Eventually, provoked by the news that raids were taking place elsewhere in the city, he
returned home to check on his family – only to nd the police there too. Both Jawahar
and Motilal were arrested.38 Between December 1921 and January 1922, the British
authorities arrested an almost unbelievable total of 30,000 people in connection with
the hartals.39 It was hard for them not to arrest even more. Jawahar’s sister Betty
remembered that everyone was so keen to support Gandhi’s cause that ‘people who
were not arrested would pile into prison vans, which arrived at the jails with more
prisoners than the jailers expected or could handle. The o cials were at their wits’ ends;
what could you do with people like that?’40
The arrest of the Nehrus stirred up Congress supporters across the United Provinces
and beyond.41 Stories seeped through the tight ring of press censorship suggesting 600
arrests in Bombay, and rioting in Calcutta.42 When the Prince of Wales descended from
his train at Allahabad on the 12 December, it was to an eerie hush. Allahabad had been
a typical Indian city the day before, lled with noisy, colourful bazaars, bustling
rickshaws, children playing and ghting, the fragrant smoke of burning incense, the
bubbling of milk boiling for sweets, and the crackling of samosas being fried on roadside
stalls. Now the streets were deserted, the houses shuttered. The city was a ghost town,
with silent troops lining the empty streets, saluting the lonely state carriage that bore
the uncelebrated prince. From a population of 150,000, only a couple of thousand
spectators had turned out – and those that had were conspicuously white of skin.43 ‘It
was a spooky experience,’ David later confessed. ‘I attempted to maintain a rigid and
majestic pose in the carriage in order to show that I had risen above the insult. But
curiosity got the better of me; and, peering up the empty side streets, I was grati ed to
see peeking furtively round the corners of the blocks the heads of many Indians.’44
Though some locals were unable to resist stealing a glance at their future KingEmperor, there was no doubt that the people of Allahabad had administered a ringing
slap to the princely face. Even the stalwart Times of India was forced to admit that,
‘There is no use blinking the fact that the non-co-operators have scored their rst
success.’45 A few days later, the contrast between unpopular raj and popular

nationalism was made stark, when large numbers of Allahabad citizens turned out to
support the Nehrus as they went on trial. Jawahar’s wife and mother were among the
chosen few spectators who watched him go up before the magistrate. Four-year-old
Indira sat on Motilal’s knee throughout the proceedings.46 Jawahar was accused of
distributing notices asking people to observe a hartal, and responded by stating that he
neither recognized the British government of India, nor regarded the court as legitimate.
He described the proceedings as a farce, and refused to answer any further questions.47
The magistrate gave him six months in jail and a ne of 500 rupees, which he refused to
pay. Motilal was given the same sentence, and both were carted off to Lucknow Prison.
Now that the Nehru family was enjoying George V’s ‘hospitality’, it was ironic to
re ect that, only shortly before, the district magistrate of Allahabad demanded that
Motilal Nehru invite King George’s son to stay with him. Because Anand Bhavan was the
grandest house in Allahabad, the government intended to requisition it for the prince’s
use. Motilal had refused to comply.48 The Nehrus remained in prison until 3 March 1922,
when the authorities belatedly discovered that there had been no law against
distributing notices asking people to observe a hartal, and that therefore they had never
actually committed a crime.49
For Christmas, the royal party had moved on to the old capital of Calcutta. The
authorities had prepared for hartals and riots – as well as going to great lengths to drum
up cheering crowds. O ces of Congressmen and Muslim agitators were raided; 200
sword-sticks were found in one dissenter’s house; 10,000 arrests were made in the ten
days leading up to the prince’s arrival.50 The prince arrived to an unprecedented level
of policing, with armoured cars patrolling the side streets and a cordon around the
entire city. The city’s shops were shut, its taxis nowhere to be seen, and the roads lined
thinly, with hardly any Indians visible. Even the generous British newspapers could only
run to estimating 5000 spectators present, with 10,000 police guarding them. The
protest passed off with only one or two minor riots in the suburbs.51
The Prince of Wales ate Christmas dinner at Government House, alongside numerous
state governors, their wives, their hopeful unmarried daughters, and a few approved
Indians, including Captain Raja Sir Hari Singh, son of the Maharaja of Kashmir. A fairylit Boxing Day ball was held in honour of the royal guest. It was a dazzling event, and
markedly multicoloured. Hindu, Sikh, Muslim and Anglo-Indian guests mingled with
British o cials. Lady Ronaldshay wore a gown of heavy yellow crêpe de Chine; the
Maharani of Burdwan wore a gown of gold tissue embossed with roses, with an overlaid
sari of gold lace; Mrs Shelley Banerjee wore charmeuse trimmed with lace and jet; and
Mrs Sunanda Sen wore purple brocade accented with golden sprigs of maidenhair fern.
Dickie danced the foxtrot with Miss Scott, and the Calcutta One-Step with Miss
Gamble.52
After Christmas, David opened the Victoria Memorial Hall, a magni cent museum in
Calcutta. He quoted his great-grandmother Queen Victoria’s proclamation of 1858 about
the Indians: ‘In their prosperity will be our strength; in their contentment our security;
and in their gratitude our best reward.’ With impressive optimism, he added: ‘It is tting
that this memorial to the Great Queen-Empress should be opened at a time when her

dreams for the Indian Empire have come true.’53 Perhaps, among the fashionable and
integrated elites of Calcutta, it was possible to believe that they had.
On 13 January, the prince arrived at the wealthy city of Madras. A complete hartal
had been planned, but did not come o in the manner Gandhi would have intended. As
Dickie wrote, ‘As in Bombay, so here, on nding that their Non-Violence system
produced no results they resorted to Violence.’54 It ended up as a riot, with troops and
policemen stoned, cars and buildings vandalized. British troops were forced to use
armoured cars and bayonets just a stone’s throw from where the prince was staying at
Government House. In the heart of the European quarter, the mob came across a
pavilion decorated with ags and palms, under the protection of a solitary policeman.
They knocked him over and destroyed the decorations, trampling the torn remnants of
the Union Jack into the mud. They smashed up and attempted to burn down the
Wellington cinema and a car showroom next door. A British journalist was horri ed to
discover a dead body with its head beaten in, lying in the road outside the cinema.55
Dickie reported another casualty: a Government House taxi deliberately ran over a man
aiming a brick through the windscreen, ‘leaving him a somewhat shapeless mass in the
road’.56
By the next day, order had been restored and the prince was cheered at the races.57
Swiftly, the tour got back on track. On 15 January, Dickie went to visit the Theosophical
Society in Madras, which was presided over by the eccentric Baroness de Kuster, a friend
of his sister. The baroness attempted to explain reincarnation and astral projection to a
sceptical Dickie, and imparted to him that Annie Besant had recently identi ed the
future Emperor of India, David, as the reincarnation of a former Emperor of India,
Akbar the Great. ‘David was not over-pleased at the idea of having been a “black man”,
so I did not inform him that his soul had previously been shared by a group of horses,’
Dickie noted.58
The royal tour ground on, zigzagging up through the belly of India and stopping in
Bangalore, Mysore, Hyderabad, and Indore. By 4 February, it had reached Bhopal,
where Dickie and David were the guests of the only woman ruler in Asia, the Nawab
Sultan Jahan Begum. The Begum was an ardent Muslim, and usually ruled from behind
a purdah screen. The rare sight of her tiny gure, swathed in a blue burka, next to the
white-uniformed Prince of Wales, gave the tour’s photographers some of their best
opportunities.59 But it was an image more connected to the past than to the future.
Gandhi’s non-cooperation movement had reached a crescendo. Protests against the
prince had been extensive, and had come from all quarters of Indian society – crossing
boundaries of wealth, caste and religion. Elsewhere in the Empire, colonies were being
o ered self-government. The provisional government of the Irish Free State had just met
for the rst time, under the leadership of freedom ghter Michael Collins. Collins had,
controversially, accepted a form of dominion status within the British Empire, providing
a model for what might shortly be o ered to India. The Irish Free State was not to prove
a resounding success, but its inception revealed an empire shifting gear from conquest
to retreat.
Gandhi could have had every expectation of a swift victory. Best of all, the British

were just about to do the worst thing possible from their point of view and arrest him.
Gandhi’s imprisonment would be met with an international outcry; his trial would make
headlines all over the world; inevitably, he would have to be released, and subsequently
listened to. This would put the British in exactly the same position as they had recently
occupied in Ireland, where they had had to overlook Michael Collins’s terrorist activities
and negotiate with him. Gandhi would be o ered a deal, just as Collins had been o ered
a deal. All he had to do was stand firm.60
It came as some surprise, then, that Gandhi did not stand rm. Instead, he called o
the non-cooperation movement, cancelled all further agitation against the British and
backed down, declaring that his followers had sinned against God; that to continue the
campaign would be to obey Satan; and that India was not ready for self-government.
His reason was a single incident of mob violence that occurred in the small town of
Chauri Chaura in the United Provinces, the day after the Prince of Wales had been
photographed with the Begum of Bhopal.
Gandhi was nowhere near Chauri Chaura at the time of the incident: he was 800 miles
away in Bardoli. But the facts that were reported to him three days later overwhelmed
him with a sense of personal responsibility. A peaceful demonstration had been taking
place in the town. The Indian constables policing it had attacked some demonstrators.
The demonstrators had turned on the constables; this had upped the stakes, and the
constables shot into the crowd. When their bullets ran out, they ran to the police station
for shelter. The demonstrators surrounded the station, set re to it, and burned the
constables alive. Twenty-two policemen were killed.61
The event di ered neither in character nor greatly in scale from the previous riots in
Bombay or Madras. Yet something about Chauri Chaura particularly upset Gandhi. ‘Let
the opponent glory in our humiliation or so called defeat,’ he wrote. ‘It is better to be
charged with cowardice and weakness than to be guilty of denial of our oath and to sin
against God.’62 He went on a ve-day fast to purify himself, and withdrew from all
further satyagraha activities, with the exception of the boycott on British goods. He
declared an intention to concentrate henceforth on ‘constructive’ activities: absolute
non-violence; the setting-up of Congress organizations in every village; a spinningwheel in every home; the rejection of ornamentation; Hindu–Muslim unity; ‘puri cation’
of the Hindus by abstention from drink and drugs; and ‘killing the snake of
untouchability’.63 Put simply, these were unachievable aims. The British themselves
could not have drawn up a more prohibitive list of conditions against their own
departure.
Gandhi’s sudden withdrawal sent the British into a panic. Sir George Lloyd, the
Governor of Bombay, was ready to take him into custody. Back in London, Edwin
Montagu, the Secretary of State for India, was preparing to announce the Mahatma’s
arrest in the House of Commons. But it was obviously absurd to arrest an agitator
immediately after he had stopped agitating. The Viceroy, Lord Reading, summoned his
emergency council, but it could not reach a decision. In the end, he himself made the
call. Soon after midnight, his secretary telegraphed a coded message to London,
informing Montagu that the arrest was off.64

Lloyd was so furious he threatened to resign, and later declared, with a touch of
hyperbole, that ‘Gandhi’s was the most colossal experiment in world history, and it came
within an inch of succeeding.’65 But his shock, confusion and anger could not compare to
that felt by Gandhi’s own followers. ‘The drastic reversal of practically the whole of the
aggressive programme may be politically unsound and unwise,’ Gandhi told them with
lucid self-awareness, ‘but there is no doubt that it is religiously sound.’66 Jawaharlal
Nehru, still languishing in a British jail for his own part in the satyagraha campaign,
was devastated. Fifteen years later, the sense of disappointment was still tangible when
he argued that ‘the non-violent method was not, and could not be, a religion or an
unchallengeable creed or dogma. It could only be a policy and a method promising
certain results, and by those results it would have to be nally judged. Individuals might
make of it a religion or incontrovertible creed. But no political organization, so long as
it remained political, could do so.’67
The split between Nehru and Gandhi was deeply damaging for Congress. Nehru, who
declared that religion ‘ lled me with horror’ and was ‘the enemy of clear thought’, had
never signed up to ght a holy war; Gandhi, who believed that ‘no man can live without
religion’ and that ‘those who say that religion has nothing to do with politics do not
know what religion means’, could never have envisaged anything else.68 Exhilarated
though he had been by Gandhi’s whirlwind arrival on the political scene, Nehru quickly
realized that the Mahatma’s argument provided the British with the permanent means to
defeat him.
The rest of the tour passed in relative calm, with the only story being the gossip about
Dickie Mountbatten and Edwina Ashley. Edwina had nally reached the east she had
dreamed of, and swiftly discarded her chaperone. She arrived in the riot-torn city of
Bombay to realize that she could only a ord a third-class train ticket to Delhi. It would
have meant sitting, eating and sleeping on bare boards for two days, clumped together
with poor Indians and their livestock. Edwina was happy to do so, but the clerk atly
refused to sell the elegant young Englishwoman a third-class ticket.69 This functioned as
a useful opportunity for the handsome former prince Dickie to come gallantly to a fair
maiden’s rescue – he sent to her aid an Indian Army colonel, who put her on the mail
train.70 Her beau met her at the station on 12 February, and they fell happily into each
other’s arms. Two days later, there was a St Valentine’s Day dance at the Viceregal
Lodge. Mountbatten wrote in his diary: ‘I danced 1 and 2 with Edwina; she had 3 and 4
with David, and the 5th dance we sat out in her sitting-room, when I asked her if she
would marry me, and she said she would.’71 Edwina chose an old Indian ring from
Schwaiger’s art gallery.72 Three days later, Dickie was o with David to Patiala. The
Vicereine, Lady Reading, dispatched a dismissive letter to Edwina’s father. ‘I am afraid
she has de nitely made up her mind about him,’ she wrote of the happy couple. ‘I hoped
she would have cared for someone older, with more of a career before him.’73 Dickie did
not believe that his youth was a problem. ‘I have never really sown any wild oats,’ he
confessed to his mother, ‘and as I never intend to, I haven’t got to get over that stage
which some men have to.’74
On 17 March the Prince of Wales boarded the Renown at Karachi, and sailed for

Ceylon and Japan. The breath that had been held since his arrival in Bombay exactly
four months before could nally be let out. ‘Regret not unmingled with relief may be
said to sum up the feelings of most loyal subjects of the British Crown, on the occasion
of the departure of the Prince of Wales from our shores to-day,’ commented the
Statesman. ‘Probably the feeling of relief is predominant.’ It concluded that ‘the
reception accorded to His Royal Highness has been such as to make every true friend of
this country hang his head in shame.’75 A sense of shame and depression would be felt
on both sides. The prince’s tour had revealed the acute unpopularity of the British in
India. Gandhi’s campaign against it had revealed the weakness of the alternative.

CHAPTER 5: PRIVATE LIVES

, LORD LOUIS MOUNTBATTEN MARRIED THE Hon. Edwina Ashley at St Margaret’s Church,
ON 18 JULY 1922
Westminster. It was the wedding of the year.1 Policemen linked arms to hold back the
crowd of 8000 people, which had not been deterred by the drizzly London weather.2
The guests included most of the royal family, led by Queen Mary, imposing in plumes,
feathers, and fat strands of pearls; and her seventy-seven-year-old mother-in-law, Queen
Alexandra, stylish in a jewelled turban and a long coat edged with black fur. The groom
arrived, looking impossibly tall, slim and handsome next to his diminutive best man,
David, the Prince of Wales. The bride debuted in a gown of silver tissue. Among her
bridesmaids were the four sisters of Prince Philip of Greece, wearing gigantic lace
bonnets.3 (Just weeks afterwards, a coup in Greece would nearly be the end of them.
They would be saved by the timely intervention of the British Foreign O ce, with the
future husband of the British Queen cradled in an old orange crate. Mountbatten, in
later years, would do little to discourage the story that it was he who had organized the
rescue – but this was pure fantasy.)4 The newlyweds emerged to great cheers from the
crowd, and went on to host a reception for 1400 guests at Brook House, before driving
o towards Edwina’s country house in the Rolls-Royce Silver Ghost that the bride had
bought the groom for a wedding present.
Despite her position as the heiress to an immense fortune, Edwina had been brought
up with austerity. She had always travelled third class (apart from when an Indian
railway clerk had prevented her from doing so) and existed on a modest allowance. The
rst time she was allowed to have lunch with a man unchaperoned was when Dickie
took her to Claridge’s after they became engaged; the rst time she used make-up was
when she wore a pale pink lipstick on her wedding day.5 After she married, the
economies ended. During the ve indulgent months of their honeymoon, Dickie and
Edwina went to stay with Dickie’s uncle, the Grand Duke of Hesse, and toured Europe in
the Silver Ghost. The jewellery Edwina received as wedding gifts attracted so much
attention that Dickie took to sleeping with a gun under his pillow. When a thief broke
into their bedroom, in Angoulême, he made enough of a kerfu e while scrabbling
around in the bedsheets for it to scare o the would-be felon. 6 From Europe, the
newlyweds sailed to New York, and crossed the United States, ending up in Hollywood.
They stayed at Pickfair, the Beverly Hills mansion owned by movie stars Mary Pickford
and Douglas Fairbanks. The Fairbankses were away, so Charlie Chaplin graciously
stepped in to act as their host. Chaplin o ered them a unique wedding present: the
chance to star in one of his short lms. The plot was inspired by the couple’s true life
adventures, for Edwina plays the victim of a gang of jewel thieves. She is saved by
Chaplin in trademark guise as the little tramp, and by a prettily made up Dickie.

Edwina’s vast wealth and Dickie’s social connections allowed the Mountbattens to live
the most fashionable of lives. Edwina indulged Dickie’s fantasies of naval glory by
giving him a special suite at their London home, Brook House in Mayfair, modelled on a
ship’s cabin. The walls and ceilings were enamelled in white, and fake pipes and cables
artfully arranged. Portholes were carved out of a wall, and electric fans blew through
them to lull Dickie with a gentle sea breeze. He slept in a bunk, complete with brass rail
to prevent him from falling out, should a typhoon strike Park Lane. There was a life-size
mannequin of an admiral, dressed in a selection of relics of Prince Louis of Battenberg,
including his hat, uniform and decorations; an imposing sight indeed in a newlywed’s
bedroom. Edwina’s suite, meanwhile, was lled with lace, silk and swansdown.7 Dickie
was allowed in only sporadically. ‘Slept with Edwina!!’ he would write triumphantly in
his diary after one of these rare intimacies.8
From the outside, the Mountbattens looked like the most golden couple in London. But
it took only two years of marriage for Edwina to tire of having plighted her troth
exclusively to Dickie. Dickie was deeply attached to the Navy, and spent more of his
time fussing over it than over her.9 When he did fuss over her, he fussed too much.
Dickie had come from a happy, intimate home, and wanted to recreate a family in
which everything was a team e ort. Edwina had grown up in a household in which
privacy and independence had been the norm, sometimes to the point of dysfunction.
Dickie’s marital behaviour was exactly the opposite of what Edwina wanted: starving
her of attention for months at a time, then smothering her with domesticity.
The couple had two daughters together, Patricia in 1924 and Pamela in 1929. Often
they had the young Prince Philip of Greece to stay after he began his education at
Cheam prep school in 1930.10 Behind this illusion of wedded bliss, Edwina embarked on
a long and ostentatious series of a airs. These started very early on, even if one
discounts the claim Charlie Chaplin once dropped into conversation about Edwina
having made a pass at him during her honeymoon.11 Dickie’s posting to the Dardanelles
aboard HMS Revenge in 1923 left his young wife alone to the gaudy pleasures of
London’s night life, and she – still quite recently emancipated from her maiden existence
– made the most of them. ‘Went to see David at St James’s Palace,’ Dickie wrote warily
in his diary on 3 December 1925. ‘He had a queer story about Edwina.’12
There would be many more queer stories to come. In October 1926, the San Francisco
Chronicle ran a lurid story entitled ‘A Royal “Spanking” for Gay Lady Mountbatten’.
Though not quite as scandalous as it sounds to modern ears, the article was damaging
enough. It contained a list of her misdeeds, which were said to have included an
inappropriate Charleston with Fred Astaire, and a orid description of the rebuke she
had allegedly received from Queen Mary.13 By then, Dickie knew all too well that his
wife was doing more than the Charleston with some of her ‘ginks’, as her admirers
became known. He was devastated. His younger daughter, Pamela, later said that he
had nurtured a romantic dream about ‘a wife that was purer than pure’, whom he could
put on a pedestal and would support his career indefatigably: ‘And then, of course, he
finds that she’s not like that at all.’14 He wrote Edwina a piteous letter:

I wish I knew how to irt with other women, and especially with my wife. I wish I’d sown more wild oats in my
youth, and could excite more than I fear I do. I wish I wasn’t in the Navy and had to drag you out to Malta. I wish I
had an equal share of the money so that I could give you far handsomer presents than I can really at present honestly
manage. In other words, I’d like to feel that I was really worthy of your love.15
‘I feel I’ve been such a beast,’ was Edwina’s typical reply. ‘You were so wonderful about
everything and I do realise how hard it all was for you, altho’ I know you think I don’t. I
feel terribly about it all.’16 But the terrible feeling never prevented her from doing it
again. Edwina did not bother to be secretive about her a airs, and hints of her liaisons
were scattered through newspaper headlines, gossip columns and the memoirs of
nightclub hostesses.17 In 1928, the Mountbattens called in the newspaper magnate Lord
Beaverbrook to help quash an American divorce case in which Edwina would have been
cited as co-respondent.18
Despite the Mountbattens’ marital dramas, the marriage did not break up. There had
been a decisive row, with Edwina sitting in her bath, sobbing, and telling Dickie that she
wanted to be free. Dickie agreed to leave the next morning, and retired to bed. His cool
reaction worked: it was Edwina who came to his room to make up. They agreed to stay
together, though with, e ectively, an open relationship. 19 Dickie had realized, with a
commendable grasp of reality that would elude him in his working life, that he could not
have his wife to himself. Edwina would be allowed her boyfriends: and Dickie,
somewhat perfunctorily, would take a girlfriend. He met Yola Letellier, the wife of a
French newspaper owner, at a polo game. According to Dickie’s younger daughter,
Pamela, ‘He didn’t fall head over heels, but he found her very attractive, to irt with, to
dance with, and to enjoy life with.’20 Though it may have been adultery in a technical
sense, Dickie’s relationship with Yola would demonstrate his instinctive urge for delity.
They would stay together, in one form or another, for decades.
Edwina was furious about Dickie’s consolation a air. ‘It was all right for her to have
her own boyfriend, but she wasn’t so keen on my father having his girlfriend,’
remembered Patricia. ‘She su ered from this dreadful jealousy all her life and even
when she didn’t want him herself she still hated the thought of him with anyone else.’21
Edwina swiftly and unhelpfully befriended her husband’s girlfriend, going to great
lengths to create trouble. On one occasion, Dickie arrived in Paris for a weekend with
Yola to nd a note saying that Edwina had taken her to Austria.22 When he complained,
Edwina let rip in the most unreasonable tones. ‘I have never in any way tried to pinch
her from you’, she wrote angrily. ‘I don’t want our friendship spoiled … by this
ridiculous attitude you have been taking up: jealousy, hurt feelings, and all over
nothing.’23 But the person in the marriage who su ered most frequently from jealousy
was Edwina. She was jealous of Yola, extracting a promise from Dickie not to marry her
if he were widowed; she was jealous of the Navy; she was even jealous of her own
daughters. Even when Patricia was a grown woman, she had to conspire to meet her
father in secret to avoid incurring her mother’s wrath.24
In contrast to her intense jealousy towards women, Edwina never showed any sign of
the least resentment towards the men in her husband’s life. There was quite a number of

them; and there have been persistent rumours that he was homosexual. Several of his
closest friends were gay, including Noël Coward, Tom Driberg, and a left-wing exGuards o cer called Peter Murphy who virtually cohabited with the Mountbattens for
many years. Coward had met the Mountbattens after their trip to America with the
Prince of Wales in 1924. He had always had a ‘hero-worship for the Royal Navy’, and
the friendship blossomed despite the fact that the two men were quite di erent. 25
‘Temperamentally we were diametrically opposed,’ Coward admitted; ‘practically all
our interests and pleasures and ambitions were so divergent that it was di cult to
imagine how, over such a long period of time, we could have found one another such
good company.’26 And yet they did. By the 1930s, they were close enough that Coward
went on holiday with the Mountbattens in Gozo: ‘I spent one of the gayest months I
have ever spent with him and Edwina in Malta’, he later wrote; it should probably be
assumed he meant ‘jolliest’.27 Coward passed his time lounging around at the
Mountbattens’ house, the Casa Medina, stripped to the waist, and tanning himself to a
dark teak nish.28 On his return to England, he wrote a thank-you letter to Dickie,
addressing him as ‘Dear dainty Darling’, and went on:
I could not have enjoyed my holiday more … Please be careful of your Zippers Dickie dear and don’t let me hear of
any ugly happenings at Flotilla dances.
Love and kisses
Signal Bosun Coward
(I know Bosun ought to be spelt ‘Boatswain’ but I don’t care!)29
The fact that Mountbatten was not threatened by gay men does not automatically imply
that he himself was gay; it could be taken to signify the opposite. His reaction on being
told that one of his servants was gay was characteristically un ustered. ‘Of course,’ he
replied. ‘All the best valets are.’30 The conclusion drawn by most of those who knew him
was that, while he enjoyed irtation with everyone, Dickie was not terribly interested in
actually having sex with anyone.
As their marriage oundered, the Mountbattens’ separate pursuits grew ever more
important. While Edwina partied, Dickie invented things. He became obsessed with
time-saving devices. He equipped himself with elasticated shoes, had his braces stitched
permanently to his trousers, and wore a buttonless waistcoat that could be pulled on
over his head like a jumper. His valet even reported that Dickie invented a ‘Simplex’
shirt with built-in Y-fronts, ‘that he could slide into like a stretch suit’. Edwina had
started to nd her husband tiresome and unattractive.31 But her extramarital social life
was not making her happy, either. She was by no means the only person to notice that
London in the 1920s was a whirl of overcrowded parties that felt empty. It was a theme
of the time, most memorably captured in Evelyn Waugh’s Vile Bodies, but also occupying
any number of less celebrated literary works such as Jig-Saw, the rst novel by Edwina’s
friend Barbara Cartland. Noël Coward’s party farce Hands Across the Sea was a straight
parody of the Mountbattens; apologetically, he sent them six tickets for the premiere in
recognition of the fact.32 Edwina’s life was a constant rotation of luncheon-parties,

garden-parties, cocktail-parties, dinner-parties and weekend house-parties. When she
was not at parties, she was planning parties, or buying new dresses for parties, or
carrying on illicitly with the men she had met at parties, or recovering from the
hangovers she had incurred by going to too many parties. The Mountbattens often
received three or four invitations for the same evening. ‘To those who knew her best it
seemed she was just burning up energy because she did not know what else to do with
it,’ commented one semi-authorized biographer.33 As she approached thirty, she began
to plot an escape. She planned to travel the world, and her rst choice of destination –
Moscow – betrayed the stirring of a new political interest in her mind.
Mohandas Gandhi had su ered greatly from his retreat after Chauri Chaura. In his
absence, control of Congress had passed to Motilal Nehru and C.R. Das. At the end of
1922, they had formed a group called the Swarajya Party within Congress, aiming at a
swift transition to dominion status. This was well supported in India, but the British
Home Member of the Indian government, Sir Malcolm Hailey, put a stop to it. The
‘responsible government’ stated as the aim of British policy since 1919, he said, did not
imply a fully responsible government, nor one that had dominion status. ‘It may be,’ he
said during the debate, ‘that full dominion self-government is the logical outcome of
responsible government, nay, it may be the inevitable and historical development of
responsible government, but it is a further and nal step.’34 Indian hopes were dashed
again.
Motilal Nehru followed Jawahar’s lead, and gave up everything for Gandhi: his legal
career, his ne clothes, his Western dining room, his stable of horses and his wine cellar.
Only one trapping of his former life remained. ‘I have done all these things for you,
Bapu,’ his daughter Betty remembered him saying to Gandhi, ‘but I am an old man and
accustomed to my ways. Whether you like it or not, I am going to have my two pegs
[whiskies] before dinner.’35
Meanwhile, the relationship between Gandhi and the younger Nehru was intense,
fraught and semi-paternal. The two men had wildly di erent political and philosophical
ideas, but a peculiarly potent sympathy with each other, both emotional and practical.
Gandhi needed a link to the temporal world; Nehru needed a guru. It suited Gandhi well
to groom this young radical, for he had found no serious political heir among his four
sons. In fact, by the middle 1920s, his relationships with them had become extremely
di cult. When eighteen-year-old Manilal was caught in an embrace with a young,
married Indian woman, Mohandas coerced her into shaving her head, and extracted
from Manilal a vow of lifelong chastity.36 In 1926, still languishing under his vow,
Manilal fell in love with a Muslim woman called Fatima. Mohandas was outraged. ‘Your
desire is against your religion’, he wrote to Manilal. ‘It would be like putting two swords
in one scabbard … Your marriage will be a great jolt to Hindu–Muslim relations.’37
Manilal did not marry Fatima, though he was nally released from his vow at the age
of thirty- ve, and married a Hindu woman. It was then the turn of Mohandas’s third
son, Devadas, who fell in love with Lakshmi, the daughter of Chakravarty

Rajagopalachari, one of the leading lights of Congress and a member of the Brahmin
caste. The fathers would only agree to the inter-caste marriage if Devadas and Lakshmi
waited for ve years to see if their feelings changed. Happily, they did not. The couple
married in 1933.38
Despite the many failures of his brahmacharya policy, Gandhi persisted in enforcing it
at his ashrams, and broke up several marriages by persuading the women to renounce
sex.39 It was a eld in which he and Nehru could never be reconciled. Nehru wrote that
Gandhi’s sex ban ‘can only lead to frustration, inhibition, neurosis, and all manner of
physical and nervous ills’.40 As for Gandhi’s decree that birth control was a particular
sin, for it allowed a person ‘to indulge his animal passions and escape the consequences
of his acts’, Nehru considered it to be outrageous. ‘Personally I nd this attitude
unnatural and shocking, and if he is right, then I am a criminal on the verge of
imbecility and nervous prostration.’41
Nehru was aware that the gulf between Gandhi and himself was deep. Much of his
autobiography chronicled their di erences. And yet the two continued to be the closest
of friends. ‘People who do not know Gandhiji personally and have only read his
writings are apt to think that he is a priestly type, extremely puritanical, long-faced,
Calvinistic, and a kill-joy,’ Nehru wrote. ‘He is the very opposite … His smile is
delightful, his laughter infectious, and he radiates light-heartedness. There is something
childlike about him which is full of charm.’42
Whatever his moral eccentricities and political failures, Gandhi’s charm and charisma
ensured that he remained popular both within Congress and in the nation at large. The
millions of admirers he attracted from among the general public greeted him not as a
politician, but as a spiritual guru. They cannot be accused of misconstruction. Nehru
went around the United Provinces with Gandhi during 1929, and was struck by the
masses of ordinary people who turned up – amounting to tens of thousands every few
miles. Gandhi’s tour was a basic a air. He brought no means of ampli cation and,
consequently, these heaving throngs had little chance of making out what he was
saying. ‘Probably they did not expect to hear anything,’ Nehru observed; ‘they were
satis ed if they saw the Mahatma.’43 He was right, and it went further than that. An
American correspondent watched in awe as people surged forward towards Gandhi at
the end of one of these meetings, desperate to touch the hem of his garment.44 Sanskrit
has a useful word which Nehru used to describe Gandhi’s appearances: darshan, meaning
the act of seeing or being seen by a divinity.
Among those who found Gandhi inspirational was Kamala Nehru. ‘Close contact with
Gandhiji opened up a new world to her,’ remembered her daughter, Indira.45 Kamala,
like many Hindu girls, had been taught that the highest accomplishment at which a
woman could aim was the emulation of Sita – the legendary wife of Rama, whose
obedience and chastity were rewarded with rejection and slander, and whose
achievement was to bring up twin sons alone, deliver them unto the husband who had
rejected her, and then roll over and be swallowed up by the earth.46 But Kamala had
married Jawaharlal Nehru, who thought little of meek obedience and still less of pretty
ignorance. She had been only seventeen when they married, and barely educated – but

she became a brave, spirited and politically active woman. Visits to Europe with her
husband strengthened both her notions of racial identity and her feminist tendencies.
She wrote from London: ‘When I think of the plight of my sisters my heart bleeds for
they are indi erent to the question of their own rights. Day by day I am getting more
and more determined that on my return home I shall take my sisters along with me, I
shall urge them to place their trust in God and ght for their own freedom, educate their
daughters so that they are not in trouble like us and join the struggle for independence
so that we do not have to spend our lives in shame.’47 Yet, despite her increasing
interest in politics, she and her husband were barely happier together than they had
been on their disjointed honeymoon. Jawahar was struck to see paintings for sale at
bazaars, depicting Kamala and him with the caption ‘Adarsha jori’ – ‘The ideal couple’.48
Kamala was never in good health after the birth of the couple’s daughter, Indira, in
1917. In 1924, she and Jawahar had a premature baby boy, who soon perished. The
experience further ruined her constitution, and she developed tuberculosis. Jawahar was
obliged to take her to Europe for long periods so that she might recuperate in Alpine
sanatoria. Even outside India, Jawahar took no rest from Congress activities, travelling
tirelessly around the European capitals, followed, somewhat to his pride, by the British
secret service, which he described as ‘the best in the world’.49
Lonely and bored, Kamala struck up a correspondence with Syed Mahmud, a Muslim
friend of Nehru’s from his Cambridge days. She encouraged him to correct her Urdu, and
debated with him her new-found interest in women’s rights.50 She urged him to educate
his daughters and to remove the women of his family from the strictures of purdah. ‘I
want you men to be put in purdah for some years, and then I should ask you what it is
like.’51
She was able to con de to Mahmud her innermost feelings, which at that time could
be dark and unhappy. ‘I am of no use to the world and am making it heavier every day
by doing nothing: only eating and sleeping,’ she confessed. ‘I cannot earn my living and
am a burden to everybody. I wish that my end will come soon. Your brother [Jawahar]
cannot do his work owing to me. There is no other way to free him of his burden.’52
Mahmud later described her as ‘an angel of the house’, ‘goodness personi ed’, and
confessed that she was ‘like a sister to me’.53 But, for all that her friends could see
Kamala’s virtues, her own husband remained distant, and only intermittently
affectionate.
In the summer of 1927, Motilal arrived at Kamala’s Swiss sanatorium, and with his
entrance the austerity of Jawahar’s household vanished. Kamala, Betty, Indira and
Jawahar went all around Europe with him rst-class, staying in luxury hotels and
driving in limousines. In Berlin, Jawahar and Motilal received an invitation from the
Soviet government to go to Moscow for the tenth anniversary celebrations of the
Russian Revolution. Jawahar was thrilled by Moscow, and by his perceptions of
comradely idealism, though he was horri ed by the brutality of the Stalinist regime.
Motilal felt the horror, but not the thrill. The suite in the Grand Hotel was lled with
gold and velvet furniture covered up with coarse cloth: its tsarist opulence did not t
with communist tastes. It was freezing, and Betty was alarmed to discover that there

was no hot water to bathe in – ‘though Father succeeded by making a tremendous
fuss’.54
When Jawahar nally returned to India, he was driven by a new con dence. His
fellow Congressmen began to joke that ‘vodka has gone to his head’.55 ‘In a hundred
ery speeches all over India he preached the doctrine of complete independence’, wrote
Betty. ‘So radical was he that even Gandhiji protested that he was moving too fast, and
Father was terribly worried.’56 Motilal’s concern was that his son on the left, and Subhas
Chandra Bose on the right, would split Congress. Towards the late 1920s, the
independence movement had lost much of its vitality. Nehru had been in Europe;
Gandhi’s focus had been on his two personal campaigns, swadeshi – self-su ciency, or
the campaign to buy Indian-made goods – and khadi, or hand-spinning of cloth. It came
as something of a surprise to all sides when, in March 1927, the British government
announced that it was appointing a commission to look into India’s future.57
The Simon Commission, led by Sir John Simon and including a junior Labour MP
called Clement Attlee, arrived in India in February 1928, to investigate possible changes
to the Indian constitution. Indian politicians were outraged: every single man on the
Commission was British, and they had had enough of Britons imposing constitutions
upon them. Immediately, Congress and the Muslim League came together to organize
protests. ‘Once again, by lack of elementary tact, the British did for us what we could
not seem to do ourselves,’ wrote Betty, wryly, ‘they uni ed India.’58 The protests would
give Jawaharlal Nehru his first experience of violence at the hands of the state.
Sixteen people with a ag had been de ned as constituting an illegal procession, and
so Nehru led a group of exactly that description through the back streets of Lucknow.
They had not gone more than a couple of hundred yards when mounted policemen rode
them down and let y with their lathis, bamboo sticks with metal tips. As he saw his
fellow demonstrators being thrashed, Jawahar’s instinct was to hide – but he forced
himself instead to face the aggression. A policeman approached him on horseback, and
Jawahar simply asked him to go ahead, before turning his head away. From high atop
his horse the policeman struck two blows on Jawahar’s body. Jawahar did not fall, and
was saved from further injury by the intervention of local officials.59
The next day, when the Simon Commission actually arrived, a few thousand
assembled for a protest on the maidan. They were charged by mounted policemen, who
galloped their horses right up to the crowd, trampling innocent bystanders as they went.
Once again, the policemen hit out with batons and lathis. Nehru had to ght down the
urge to strike back.60
Nehru and his compatriots emerged from their beating with their esh thoroughly
morti ed. He himself had received a serious injury to his arm, which would trouble him
for the rest of his life, though he was too proud to admit it in his autobiography.
‘Injuries severe but not serious’, he telegraphed to friends in London. ‘Hope survive the
British Empire.’61
It looked like he might, for the British general election of May 1929 returned a
minority Labour government: weak, but determined to move on Indian policy. Lord
Irwin was summoned back to London in June; he returned to Delhi in October, and

made a proclamation:
In view of the doubts which have been expressed both in Great Britain and India regarding the interpretation to be
placed on the intentions of the British Government in enacting the Statute of 1919, I am authorised on behalf of His
Majesty’s Government to state clearly that in their judgment it is implicit in the declaration of 1917 that the natural
issue of India’s constitutional progress as there contemplated is the attainment of Dominion Status.62
It had taken twelve years to clear up that misunderstanding; an incredible amount of
time during which many opportunities had been lost. It would take a further eighteen
years before India actually achieved dominion status. A great many more opportunities,
a very large amount of money, and hundreds of thousands of human lives would be
sacrificed along the way.

CHAPTER 6: WE WANT NO CAESARS

monopoly on salt. It was illegal to go to the
IN INDIA, THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT HAD LONG ENFORCED A
beach and collect it, and more illegal still to sell it on. When salt was sold legitimately,
a tax went directly to the British government, providing a total of three per cent of its
revenue from India.1 This gave Gandhi the cue for the most iconic of all his campaigns,
the one which sealed his international fame: the Salt March.
In 1930, Gandhi announced that he would organize his rst civil disobedience
campaign against the British for eight years. To Nehru’s great satisfaction, he also
declared – perhaps as a sign of lessons learned from the debacle after Chauri Chaura –
that Congress should not desist if the protest turned violent.2
Gandhi’s choice of the salt tax as a target for his protest was inspired, though it was
met with a bemusement verging on disdain when he rst presented it to Congress.3
British taxes had never been a major target of the nationalist campaign, perhaps
because they were so low: in peacetime, the raj never took more than 7 per cent of
India’s income.4 But the salt tax hit the poor disproportionately hard. It had particular
resonance because salt was a product of nature, freely given up by the sea. Gandhi
planned to go and collect it. As an ascetic, he himself had not eaten salt for six years –
but was prepared to start again for a good cause.5 This was a brilliantly simple protest,
which could involve men, women and children of all ages, castes and creeds. With the
ageing Gandhi in humble garb, walking with a sta and leading his people to freedom,
its symbolism was exquisitely pitched for a Western audience as well as for the Indian
masses.6 In March 1930, Patricia Kendall was among the many American journalists
who interviewed this strange and mystical Indian, who was fast becoming a celebrity in
world politics. ‘It is always delightful to talk to Americans,’ Gandhi greeted her.
‘Unfortunately I have little time just now, as I am preparing to march to the sea and
break the salt laws of this satanic Government.’7 On 12 March, he strode out of the
Sabarmarti ashram, followed by seventy-eight men. ‘Let nobody assume that after I am
arrested there will be no one left to guide you,’ he announced. ‘It is not I, but Pandit
Jawaharlal who will be your guide. He has the capacity to lead.’8
Gandhi and his fellow satyagrahis marched 241 miles to the shores of the Arabian Sea,
attracting many more marchers as they went. A crowd of thousands, waited upon by the
international media, arrived at the coastal village of Dandi on 5 April. They prayed all
night and, the next morning, Gandhi led them down to the ocean, and picked up a
handful of salt from the shore. The marchers immediately crowded into the sea and
lled all manner of kettles and pans, boiling them over res to evaporate the water,
leaving behind in each a few muddy crystals of contraband.
The e ect across India was sensational. Along 5000 miles of coastline, many

thousands of Indians went to the shore and simply picked up or boiled down their own
salt. The British administration in Delhi, aware that it was being made to look foolish,
started making the situation worse by arresting people. These included Nehru and
Gandhi, the latter’s detention provoking a demonstration by 100,000 people in Bombay.
And 25,000 others followed their leaders into British prisons. The American journalist
Webb Miller made his way with some di culty past the British authorities to watch a
satyagraha protest at the salt pans north of Bombay. His eyewitness report shocked the
world. Around 2500 satyagrahis clad in white khadi, led by Gandhi’s son Manilal and
the poet Sarojini Naidu, marched towards the salt deposits. Indian police guards,
commanded by a handful of British o cers, ran forward to meet the rst column of
marchers and struck at them brutally with their steel-tipped lathis. ‘Not one of the
marchers even raised an arm to fend o the blows’, Miller wrote. 9 The air lled with the
grisly thud of steel against undefended skull. The rst line fell in pools of their own
blood, many struck unconscious. The rest marched on until they, too, were beaten down.
Then a second column formed, and the same thing happened again. Hundreds of bodies
piled up, bones broken, esh slashed open, white clothes spattered and soaked with
crimson. But not a single satyagrahi fought back. Frustrated, the police began harassing
the casualties, beating them brutally, kicking them in their stomachs and groins, and
throwing their bruised bodies into ditches. That afternoon, Miller counted 320 injured
and 2 dead in the shed that served as a field hospital.
Later that year, the British Prime Minister, Ramsay MacDonald, convened a Round
Table Conference to address India’s future. He had invited representatives of ‘every
community’ to London: maharajas, Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs, Buddhists, Anglo-Indians,
Untouchables, trades unions, the Burmese, and women – who could not really be said to
constitute a community, but certainly had plenty of grievances. Congress had been
invited, but did not participate. To Nehru’s disgust, the most visible Indian gure was
the passionate but divisive Aga Khan, the super-rich hereditary leader of Shia Ismaili
Muslims.10
The rst session of the Round Table Conference opened in London on 12 November
1930, to an interminable chorus of partisan speeches by the dozens of representatives.
As the journalist Malcolm Muggeridge acidly put it, the invitation of so many delegates
ensured that ‘everything under the sun [was] represented except the 25,000 in gaol and
the 300,000,000 cultivating their small patches of overworked soil.’11 MacDonald’s
optimism soon wilted: ‘Hindu-Moslem not coming together,’ he wrote despondently in
his diary on 18 December. ‘They have no mutual con dence & Hindu too nimble for
Mosl: brethren.’12 The only agreement which could be made by the end was to plan for
an All-India Federation.
In January 1931, Gandhi, Nehru and other leaders were released by the Viceroy, Lord
Irwin, probably the most sympathetic Viceroy India had yet seen. He invited Gandhi to
the Viceroy’s House, and did not even object when the old man brought his own illegal
salt to consume pointedly in front of him. In London, Churchill launched into an
outraged condemnation of the spectacle of ‘a seditious Middle Temple lawyer, now
posing as a fakir of a type well-known in the East, striding half-naked up the steps of

the Vice-regal palace’, but Irwin ignored him.13 He was later asked whether Gandhi had
been very tiresome, to which he replied sharply: ‘Some people found Our Lord very
tiresome.’14
From 15 February to 5 March, Irwin and Gandhi prepared a pact. Congress would
discontinue its campaign of civil disobedience, lift the boycott on British goods, and send
a delegate to the second Round Table Conference. In return, political prisoners would be
freed, the swadeshi campaign would be approved, and those Indians who lived near the
sea would be allowed to make salt unhindered. India as a whole saw its Bapu (‘Father’)
being welcomed into the Viceroy’s House, and was jubilant. But Nehru wept when news
reached him of the pact, which he saw as a betrayal of Congress principles. The pact
reserved British control over defence, foreign policy, nance and the position of
minorities. It did not challenge the extortionate tax rates on peasants; salt could be
made, but not sold; and there would be no investigation into allegations of police
brutality.15
The sympathetic Lord Irwin was replaced, in a most untimely move, by the far more
hostile Lord Willingdon. Under much pressure from Willingdon, who wanted him out of
the way, Gandhi eventually agreed to go to the Round Table Conference as Congress’s
sole delegate – to the further dismay of Nehru.16
Gandhi arrived in Folkestone on 12 September aboard SS Rajputana, which was
mischievously reported to be carrying a ton of holy Ganges mud for some idolatrous
purpose.17 It had already become obvious that Gandhi’s celebrity would overshadow any
political interest in the conference. London was also playing host to a Hollywood
celebrity at that time, in the form of Charlie Chaplin, and someone with a keener sense
of publicity than judgement hit upon the idea of introducing the two.18
They met at a house just o the East India Dock Road, surrounded by a formidable
battalion of the world’s media and crowds of curious East End folk. Chaplin arrived first,
and went straight to the upstairs front room, where he waited and tried to think of
things to say to the Mahatma. A cheer from the crowd heralded Gandhi’s arrival. He
followed Chaplin upstairs, and the two men waved to their public from a rst- oor
window. They made an odd couple, each so exceptionally famous in so di erent a
context that their simultaneous appearance on one sofa was almost a cosmological
event. ‘Now came that uneasy, terrifying moment,’ Chaplin remembered, ‘when I should
say something astutely intelligent upon a subject I knew little about.’19 Bravely, he
ventured to declare himself sympathetic to India’s freedom struggle, and asked Gandhi
about his opposition to machinery. Gandhi gave his usual answer, about the real
meaning of independence being the shedding of unnecessary things, while the
photographers snapped away, ashbulbs popping. 20 Perhaps the experience did not
leave Chaplin entirely untouched. Five years later, he released Modern Times – a lm in
which he starred as a factory worker struggling against the oppressions of the machine
age.
Invited to Buckingham Palace, Gandhi turned up in his loin-cloth, delighting the
world’s media all over again. In India, Lord Willingdon was tickled to imagine the
scene. ‘I wonder what Your Majesty thought of the curious little man,’ he wrote, ‘and

whether you could realise, from the few words that you spoke to him, what a terribly
di cult little person he is.’ 21 It was the King rather than Gandhi who chose to be
di cult. He made a point of saying that Britain would have no truck with Indian
terrorism, and that he was going to see that a stop was put to it. ‘Gandhi spluttered
some excuse,’ remembered the King’s secretary, ‘but H.M. said he held him
responsible.’22 As Gandhi was about to leave, the King was heard to collar him again:
‘Remember, Mr Gandhi, I won’t have any attacks on my Empire.’ Gandhi replied, with
deft courtesy: ‘I must not be drawn into political argument in Your Majesty’s Palace
after receiving Your Majesty’s hospitality.’23 David, the Prince of Wales, had been
chatting with some Indian princes, when he noticed Gandhi shaking hands with his
father. One of the other princes murmured to David, ‘This will cost you India.’24
At the conference itself, nothing much was achieved. For two months, discussions
circled pointlessly, with snipes about precedence and protocol both re ecting and
exacerbating a lack of trust all round. Thousands of miles away, Nehru asserted that the
scales were loaded against Congress. He was right: but this situation had not been
helped by Congress sending Gandhi as its sole delegate.25 For all his fame, the Mahatma
was one man, and therefore appeared to be in a minority. B.R. Ambedkar for the
Untouchables, Tara Singh for the Sikhs, and the Aga Khan and Mohammad Ali Jinnah
for the Muslims, all demanded separate concessions for their communities – and were
more than able to shout Gandhi down. The whole performance was looking increasingly
like a op. On 8 November, Congress wired Gandhi to summon him home; he ignored
the wire, and stayed on, to no advantage whatever.
Gandhi eventually departed from Victoria Station on 5 December, to choruses of ‘For
he’s a jolly good fellow’ and the Indian nationalist anthem, ‘Vande mataram’ (‘Hail
motherland’). When Gandhi eventually arrived back at Bombay, it was to a chorus of
boos and the waving of black ags by 2000 Untouchable protesters, who viewed his
insistence that they should not be given a separate electorate from caste-Hindus as an
act of repression.26
The Round Table Conference had been a failure for everyone involved. A third session
at the end of 1932, ungraced by celebrity, troubled neither the press nor the populace.
By the early 1930s, even the British Prime Minister supported the idea of Indian selfrule. And yet independence would take until 1947. To a considerable extent the delay
may be attributed to the actions of three men: Winston Churchill, Mohammad Ali
Jinnah, and Mohandas Gandhi.27
One of the great faults of the British attitude to India was simply that it was
pigheaded. It preferred the illusion of imperial might to the admission of imperial
failure; it put prestige before common sense. And the most pig-headed of all British
politicians when it came to India was Winston Churchill who, following the defeat of his
party, had returned to the back-benches as an opposition MP. ‘I hate Indians,’ he
declared. ‘They are a beastly people with a beastly religion.’28 Churchill was fond of
quoting his father, the former Chancellor of the Exchequer Lord Randolph Churchill.

‘Our rule in India is as it were a sheet of oil spread out over and keeping free from
storms a vast and profound ocean of humanity,’ the elder Churchill had said.29 As a
metaphor, it was apt, though for di erent reasons than he intended. An oil slick does
not protect the sea from storms, but sti es all life beneath it. Winston Churchill made it
his business to incapacitate any attempt to move the Indian nation towards selfgovernment. Clement Attlee remembered of the Simon Commission recommendations
that ‘it took a very long time to get through and a great deal of harm was done during
the debates by Winston and his die-hards. Halifax [formerly Lord Irwin], who was
Viceroy, believed that there was a good chance that we might have got it accepted and
had an all-Indian Government but for Churchill and his die-hards. That is one of the
things one has to chalk down against the old boy.’30
But within Indian division, Churchill saw an opportunity. An argument continually
repeated saw the large Muslim and Untouchable minorities as being under serious threat
in Hindu-majority India. The British, in their role as paternalistic rulers, had a moral
duty to protect them. If the British left, it would be a dereliction of that duty; therefore
the British could not leave India. The existence of the Muslim League served to
strengthen this argument. Meanwhile, it suited the Muslim League to have friends in the
British establishment.
Despite the cultural and religious di erences in India in 1931, there was not yet a
mainstream demand for partition. Muslims, Sikhs and Untouchables may have requested
separate electorates, to safeguard their representation among the caste-Hindu majority;
but they did not demand separate nations. The call for Pakistan would only come to
prominence as a result of the alienation of India’s ablest Muslim politician, Mohammad
Ali Jinnah, who had walked out of the second Round Table Conference in disgust and, at
that point, appeared to be politically nished. The opposite was true. Jinnah would
soon emerge as one of the most successful politicians of the twentieth century: creating
his own country, leading it, and almost single-handedly reviving Islam as a modern
political force.
Jinnah was a successful barrister, born in Karachi and called to the bar at Lincoln’s
Inn. Tall and slender, he hardly ate, and smoked fty Craven A cigarettes a day.31 He
was often described as looking cadaverous, but this description does no justice to his
dynamism. With his smooth coi ure and glittering stare he looked more like a cobra
than a corpse. Margaret Bourke-White described at length ‘the Oxford-educated Jinnah’
with his ‘razor-sharp mind and hypnotic, smoldering eyes’.32 Jinnah had not, in fact,
been educated at Oxford: he had attended a madrassa in Karachi and a local mission
school. But it was easy to believe that this urbane gentleman, described by the New York
Times as ‘undoubtedly one of the best dressed men in the British Empire’, his public
speaking rich with quotations from Shakespeare, was part of the British elite.33
Jinnah had begun his political career in Congress. He made himself a gurehead for
Hindu–Muslim unity, and was acclaimed as such by Hindu Congress luminaries. He had
joined the Muslim League in 1913, con dent that he could act as a bridge between the
political parties. But it was the emergence of Gandhi as the spiritual leader of Congress
in 1920 that began to elbow Jinnah out. ‘I will have nothing to do with this pseudo-

religious approach to politics,’ Jinnah had said, rejecting the call for satyagraha. ‘I part
company with the Congress and Gandhi. I do not believe in working up mob hysteria.
Politics is a gentleman’s game.’34 But politics is rarely gentlemanly, and as if to prove it
there was a profound and deadly clash of personality between Jinnah and the other
English gentleman of Congress, Jawaharlal Nehru. Like his compatriot and friend, the
poet Muhammad Iqbal, Jinnah disdained ‘the atheistic socialism of Jawaharlal’. ‘We do
not want any ag excepting the League ag of the Crescent and Star,’ he would declare.
‘Islam is our guide and the complete code of our life.’35
Despite his position as one of the key gures in the rise of twentieth-century Islam,
Jinnah was no fundamentalist. His Islam was liberal, moderate and tolerant. It was said
that he could recite none of the Koran, rarely went to a mosque, and spoke little Urdu.
Much has been made of his reluctance to don Muslim out ts, his fondness for whisky,
and his rumoured willingness to eat ham sandwiches.36 In fact, he never pretended to be
anything other than a progressive Muslim, in uenced by the intellectual and economic
aspects of European culture as well as by the teachings of Mohammed.37 The game he
played was carefully considered: here was a Muslim who understood the British
su ciently to parley on equal terms, but asserted his Islamic identity strongly enough
that he could never be seen to grovel. His refusal of a knighthood was signi cant; so,
too, was his demurral in the face of Muslim attempts to call him ‘Maulana’ Jinnah,
denoting a religious teacher.38 Some historians go so far as to describe him as a ‘bad’
Muslim, revealing more about their own ideas of what a Muslim should be than about
Jinnah’s faith. In any case, the Muslim League su ered from no shortage of good
Muslims. What it had lacked was a good politician. And Jinnah was without question
one of the most brilliant politicians of his day.
Jinnah had married Rattanbai ‘Ruttie’ Petit, the daughter of a prominent Parsi
banker, when he was forty-two and she just eighteen. Rebellious and beautiful, Ruttie
had been a close friend of Jawaharlal Nehru’s sister, Nan Pandit; she was closer still,
indeed almost passionately so, to Padmaja Naidu, who would later become Jawahar’s
lover.39 The deeply personal and incestuous nature of Indian politics is plain from these
relationships.
Jinnah’s marriage was not an easy one. After the birth of their daughter, Dina, he and
Ruttie separated. Ruttie died on her thirtieth birthday in 1929, following a long
a iction with a digestive disorder. 40 Jinnah was devastated at her death, and moved to
London with Dina. He took a large house in Hampstead, was chau eured around in a
Bentley, played billiards, lunched at Simpson’s and went to the theatre. He considered
standing for parliament in the Labour interest, but was rejected by a Yorkshire
constituency, allegedly with the verdict that it would not be represented by ‘a to like
that’.41 His sister Fatima gave up a career as a dentist to become, in e ect, his hostess,
though that title belies her full signi cance. Fatima Jinnah was a woman of intelligence
and drive, and was influential in her brother’s move towards Islamic nationalism.
Jinnah had returned to politics to ght the Muslim League’s corner at the Round Table
Conference, which pitted him directly against Gandhi. ‘I had the distinct feeling that
unity was hopeless, that Gandhi did not want it,’ he told a journalist in the 1940s.42

After the conference, he returned to private life – until a friend reported to him a
comment made by his arch-rival, Jawaharlal Nehru. In conversation at a private dinner
party, Jawahar had remarked that Jinnah was ‘ nished’. Jinnah was so furious that he
packed up and headed back to India immediately, with the stated intent to ‘show
Nehru’.43 He returned ready to re up the Muslim League, which he would transform
from a scattered band of eccentrics into the second most powerful political party in
India.
But probably the most surprising obstacle to Indian independence was the man who
was widely supposed to be leading the campaign for it – Mohandas Gandhi. Gandhi’s
need for spotless moral perfection hamstrung his party’s progress. His principal object
was to make the Indian people worthy of freedom in the eyes of God. The object of
actually achieving freedom from the British was secondary. Gandhi’s most in uential
work, Hind Swaraj, published in 1908, set out very clearly his point of view: that
European civilization was corrupt, atheist and destructive, but that merely driving the
British out of India would not serve to make India free. To be free, Indians needed to
relinquish violence, material possessions, machinery, railways, lawyers, doctors, formal
education, the English language, discord between Hindu and Muslim, alcohol, and sex. It
is for this reason that his campaigns so often faltered. Gandhi stood for virtue in a form
purer than politics usually allows. Whenever he had to make a choice between virtue
and politics, he always chose virtue. He strove for universal piety, continence and
humility, regardless of the consequences. Even if a person were faced with death, or a
group with obliteration, he would sanction no compromise of moral integrity. It is
impossible to assess how the Indian nationalist struggle might have proceeded without
Gandhi, but there are ample grounds for thinking that a more earthly campaign led by a
united Congress, perhaps under the joint leadership of Motilal Nehru and Mohammad
Ali Jinnah, could have brought dominion status to India in the 1920s.44 Gandhi’s
spiritual style of leadership was a source of inspiration to millions but, politically
speaking, it was erratic. Within Congress, too, it created divisions. Congress was not a
church, and Gandhi’s mystical judgements were often di cult even for his closest
followers to accept.
A year after his appearance at the Round Table Conference, Gandhi started a new
campaign on caste. There were already tensions about his direction among his
colleagues, and this religiously and politically fraught issue would exacerbate them.
Gandhi’s own attitude to caste, which he had long accepted as the ‘natural’ order of
society, was complex.45 His renaming of the Untouchables as ‘Harijans’ (children of
God) was, for him, a way of showing respect for their role. This brought up one of the
most fundamental divisions between Nehru and Gandhi. Nehru saw social and economic
hardship as a cause of su ering, and therefore wanted to end it; Gandhi saw hardship as
noble and righteous, and therefore wanted to spread the blessings of poverty and
humility to all people.
In September 1932, Gandhi announced that he was going to embark on a ‘Fast Unto
Death’ until the British government withdrew its plan to give separate electorates to the
Untouchables under the new Indian constitution. The British were surprised. They had

presumed he would be in favour of a measure intended to improve the representation of
outcaste Hindus in government. But Gandhi was adamant. Separate electorates would
put a permanent bar between the Untouchables and other Hindus. It was not division he
wanted, but respect for the Untouchables within Hinduism.
Nehru was horri ed that Gandhi had chosen ‘a side-issue for his nal sacri ce’.46 It
was not that he considered caste unimportant. The Nehru family had been demonstrably
opposed to Untouchability for longer than Gandhi – Motilal Nehru had appalled his
more devout friends by employing an Untouchable to work as his valet and, even more
shockingly, another as his cook.47 But Jawahar worried that Gandhi was losing focus on
the larger issue of independence. It also upset him that Gandhi would opt for a ‘religious
and sentimental approach to a political question’.48
Meanwhile, the remarkable B. R. Ambedkar, who had already clashed with Gandhi at
the Round Table Conference, moved in for an open attack on the Mahatma. Ambedkar
had been born an Untouchable but, thanks to his brilliance and hard work, instead of
cleaning up feculence he had studied law in London and earned a doctorate from
Columbia University in New York. Ambedkar was outraged that Gandhi was fasting
against the granting of separate electorates to Untouchables, while apparently not
objecting to the same concession being given to Muslims or Sikhs.49 He found the
Mahatma’s glori cation of humble village life and lowly self-sacri ce patronizing, and
swiftly realized that Congress had good reason to fear his people, who numbered
millions of potential voters, being removed from its fold.50 In late September, Ambedkar
went to Poona, where Gandhi was languishing in Yeravda Jail, being fussed over by
nine doctors.51 After almost a week of hot debate, both men compromised to sign the
Poona Pact. The pact gave Untouchables a guaranteed number of seats, but not a
wholly separate electorate. In return, wells, schools, roads, temples and institutions
which had previously been closed to Untouchables would be opened to them.
Ambedkar claimed victory. ‘There was nothing noble in the fast’, he wrote. ‘It was a
foul and lthy act. The fast was not for the bene t of the Untouchables. It was against
them and was the worst form of coercion against a helpless people to give up the
constitutional safeguards of which they had become possessed … It was a vile and
wicked act.’52 Gandhi’s supporters claimed victory, too, but a serious blow had been
struck against the Mahatma’s image. The ‘Father of the Nation’ had been brought into
direct con ict with that nation’s most downtrodden people. Among many Untouchable
groups, his reputation would never recover.53
There was a sad epilogue to the story. On 15 January 1934, a colossal earthquake hit
Bihar, a rural province on the Gangetic plain beneath the Himalayas of Nepal. The
devastated area stretched from Allahabad to Darjeeling, and from Kathmandu to Patna.
The death toll was estimated at 20,000.54 Gandhi visited Bihar in March, and spoke to
the bereaved, destitute and homeless people. The earthquake, he told them, ‘is a
chastisement for your sins’. And the particular sin that he had in mind was the
enforcement of Untouchability.55
Even Gandhi’s closest supporters were horri ed. The victims of the earthquake had
included poor as well as rich; Untouchables, Muslims and Buddhists as well as caste-

Hindus. But Gandhi was explicitly blaming the victims, appropriating a terrible disaster
to promote his own religious ideas. Nehru, who had been helping the relief e ort in
Bihar, read Gandhi’s remarks ‘with a great shock’.56 But the most e ective refutation
came from Rabindranath Tagore, long one of the Mahatma’s greatest advocates. Tagore
argued caustically that this supposedly ‘divine’ justice, if such it was, constituted the
least just form of punishment imaginable.57
With even his closest adherents condemning him in public, Gandhi’s political star was
plummeting. In September 1934, he resigned from the Indian National Congress. He
singled out some of his younger followers, and bestowed upon their bowed heads his
public blessing. Through these men – including Vallabhbhai Patel, who had organized a
successful satyagraha against the land tax in Bardoli, and the Brahmin lawyer
Chakravarty Rajagopalachari – he would continue to in uence the political sphere from
the background. But principal among his followers was always Jawaharlal Nehru. The
two men came to depend on each other personally as well as politically. Jawahar’s
father, Motilal Nehru, had died in 1931, leaving a vacancy in his life. Gandhi still had
four sons; but in 1936, there was a very public scandal involving his eldest. Harilal
declared that he had converted to Islam, began calling himself Abdullah Gandhi, and
attacked his father in print. He continued to be seen drunk in public, which scarcely
suggested fervent adherence to the teachings of the Koran.58 At around this time, Gandhi
su ered from the rst of a series of nervous breakdowns. He left Kasturba and his
followers, and moved into a one-room hut in central India, far from railways or post
o ces, and among a population mostly consisting of Untouchables. 59 As after Chauri
Chaura, he withdrew from the political scene, and focused on spiritual leadership. His
hope for the future now was Jawaharlal Nehru.
During much of the drama surrounding Gandhi’s caste campaign and con ict with
Ambedkar, Jawahar had been serving lengthy prison sentences for deliberately outing
con nement orders and speaking out against the government. In August 1934, he was
brie y released on parole. He saw Kamala who was, by then, critically ill with
tuberculosis. He returned to prison desperately afraid. ‘Bad news and the waiting for
news made the days intolerably long and the nights were sometimes worse,’ he wrote.60
In October, he was o ered a grim choice by the authorities. If he gave his word that he
would stay away from politics for the duration of his sentence, he would be freed to
tend to his dying wife.
Jawahar was torn between his anxiety for Kamala and his loyalty to the freedom
movement. He was taken again to visit her. She was running a fever and seemed barely
conscious. As he was leaving, she called him over, and whispered in his ear: ‘What is this
about your giving an assurance to Government? Do not give it!’61 Back he went to
prison, full of admiration. But their new closeness was not to last long. A few months
later, at the beginning of 1935, Jawahar was allowed to visit Kamala for another couple
of days – but found that she had grown distant. ‘Somehow things went wrong’, he wrote
in his diary. ‘I felt there was a psychological change. She seemed reserved.’ He brought

her poems and pieces of writing, but she showed no interest. Instead, she told him that
she had decided to devote the rest of her life to religious contemplation, and no longer
wanted a sexual relationship. ‘Apparently I was not to come in the way of God.’62
In May, with Jawahar still in prison, Kamala went to a clinic in Germany. It proved
di cult to book a berth to Europe. King George V’s silver jubilee was coming up and,
ironically, India’s most prominent dissident family would be squeezed into a ship
crammed with hundreds of loyal British subjects going to celebrate the endurance of
their Empire.63 On 4 September, Jawahar was released suddenly from prison on
compassionate grounds, and went immediately to his wife.
It was a long journey, and Jawahar could not help but be worried, despite his semiestrangement from Kamala. ‘I feel rather lost here’, he wrote to his sister, Nan, on his
arrival in Nazi Germany. ‘I was shocked to see Kamala. She had changed greatly for the
worse.’64 He was surprised to nd German children o ering him the Hitler salute:
‘Occasionally as I pass a small group of children their arms shoot out suddenly and
without warning and they snap out – Heil Hitler! It is all done very smartly.’65 He made
a point of seeking out and using one of the few remaining Jewish shops.66 Every day, he
went to the sanatorium to see Kamala. She smiled, her eyes shining, but was too weak
for conversation.67
Kamala died early in the morning of 28 February 1936. She was cremated and her
ashes given to Jawahar, so that he might take them to Allahabad and cast them into the
sacred con uence of the Ganges and the Jumna. As he ew back over the deserts of
Arabia with the sad little urn by his side he thought, ‘She is no more, Kamala is no more,
my mind kept on repeating.’ When his plane reached Baghdad, Jawahar sent a cable to
the London publishers of his just- nished autobiography. He wanted to dedicate the
book: ‘To Kamala who is no more.’68
After Kamala’s death, Jawahar’s relationship with his only child, eighteen-year-old
Indira, became more important. With her father in prison and her mother ill, Indira had
been an introverted girl. Jawahar’s cosmopolitan sisters had viewed the uneducated
Kamala as something of a bumpkin. They could be just as dismissive of Kamala’s
daughter. Aged about thirteen, Indira overheard her aunt, Nan, describe her as ‘ugly and
stupid’.69 Like her parents before her, Indira reacted to her miserable home life by
throwing her energies into politics. Betty returned home one day to find the house full of
children dressed in homespun kurta suits. Indira had started her own organization, the
Monkey Brigade, to promote nationalist activity among children.70
Kamala’s beauty and spirit had ensured that, outside her marriage, she had had no
shortage of admirers. Most significant among these was a Parsi called Feroze Gandhy. In
1930, Feroze had been an eighteen-year-old student, watching the beautiful, fragile
Kamala, twelve years his senior, lead a demonstration at Allahabad. She had fainted,
and he had rushed to her aid. He had helped her back to Anand Bhavan, and the very
next day dropped out of college to volunteer for Congress work. Over the following
weeks and months he had been frequently observed following her on her tours, carrying
her lunchbox. Feroze had even taken up the task of cleaning out the tuberculous
woman’s spittoon – something from which the servants at Anand Bhavan recoiled.71

To much raising of eyebrows from those who had observed his devotion to Kamala,
Feroze rst proposed to Indira three years later. She refused, and he kept proposing
until 1937, when she nally accepted on the steps of Sacré-Coeur in Paris. Jawahar was
among the disapprovers, and asked her to return from Europe to Allahabad to think it
over. She refused to speak to him until he let her return to Feroze.72 After a ve-year
wait for her to nish her education at Oxford, and many more ghts with her father, she
would marry Feroze in a Hindu ceremony. During the late 1930s, Feroze had begun to
spell his surname ‘Gandhi’ – a small change which would be of inestimable value to his
wife’s future career.73
On 29 May 1932, the People newspaper in London printed a vague allusion to an a air
between an upper-class society hostess and a black man.74 The lady was supposedly
identi able as Edwina Mountbatten, and the allegation of an interracial indiscretion
horri ed Buckingham Palace so much that she was forced to bring a libel proceeding.75
Her supposed lover, also unnamed, was presumed to be the distinguished American
actor and civil rights activist Paul Robeson. Similar rumours swirled around her
relationship with Leslie Hutchinson, a nightclub singer to whom she gave a cigarette
case engraved with an affectionate message and her own name.76
The case opened in July, with Edwina’s barrister declaring that, ‘It is not too much to
say that it is the most monstrous and most atrocious libel of which I have ever heard.’77
Unusually, she was permitted to give evidence herself: and denied that she had ever so
much as met Robeson. The defence replied with an unmitigated apology. Edwina won
substantial damages, which she refused to claim. Whether or not there was actually any
truth in the story is another of the many romantic mysteries in her life. It was said that
Robeson was deeply hurt by Edwina’s denial of ever having met him.78
Fed up with England, Edwina had a new impetus to travel. She went to the South
Seas, where she joined a trading schooner and looked after the ship’s pigs. She took an
epic journey to Persia with Dickie’s sister-in-law Nada, Marchioness of Milford Haven,
with whom it was rumoured she was having an a air. The two drove themselves from
the Black Sea across the Levant to the Persian Gulf, and on through Tehran to
Persepolis, with nothing but basic camping equipment and a couple of formal out ts in
case they met anyone distinguished. They did, of course, stopping to dine in Baghdad
with King Feisal.79 In Paris, she went to see a fortune-teller who said she saw her sitting
on a throne and ruling with her husband; she laughed the prediction off.80
‘Edwina’s travels were a great mystery to me, and to a good many other men who
knew her intimately,’ one of her closest male friends later told a biographer. ‘It was as if
she wanted to get away from men for a while.’81 Not all men: further travels were
undertaken with a boyfriend, the handsome Harold Phillips, known as ‘Bunny’. Dickie
knew of the relationship, and enabled it. ‘The fact that I encourage the Rabbit’, he wrote
to Edwina, ‘is not that I don’t care but that I love you so very much that I want you to
be happy and I like him better than all your friends and have no doubt that he is au fond
nicer than me.’82 She occasionally returned home from these travels, bringing some sort

of exotic baby animal – Sabi the lion cub, Rastas the honey bear, Bozo the bushbaby –
which would be kept as a pet until it became too partial to eating shoes, or grew so
large it frightened the guests, at which point it would be deposited at the Whale Island
Zoo in Portsmouth. Among this menagerie was a chameleon, which could change its
colour at a moment’s notice. Edwina named it Gandhi.
Edwina’s scandals were nothing compared with the story that was just about to break.
On 20 January 1936, after a reign of twenty- ve-and-a-half years, King George V died.
Mountbatten’s old friend David, Prince of Wales, now became King Edward VIII of
Great Britain and Ireland, Emperor of India. David had never been keen on the idea of
being King. He thought of leaving it all behind to wed a divorcée as early as 1920, when
he repeatedly wrote to Freda Dudley-Ward from his imperial tours about the possibility
of their marrying, wondering casually: ‘who knows how much longer this monarchy
stunt is going to last’.83 But by the mid-1930s Mrs Dudley-Ward had been forgotten, and
he had fallen in love to the point of obsession with Wallis Warfield Simpson.
That summer, the Mountbattens attended a house-party at Balmoral, Queen Victoria’s
beloved castle in Scotland. Their host, the King, was accompanied as usual by the wife
of Mr Ernest Simpson. Photographs show David and Dickie playing ‘arrow golf’, of
which the precise rules are obscure: they appear to involve breaking things. Others show
Edwina and Wallis giggling together, arm in arm, the resemblance between the two
unmissable. The liaison between the King and Mrs Simpson was hardly discreet. Esmond
Harmsworth, chairman of Associated Newspapers and of the Newspaper Proprietors’
Association, was also among the guests.84 Despite this, and in fact because of it, there
would be no mention of the King’s mistress in the British press until he was actually
forced off the throne.
All over the world, everyone was talking about the King and Mrs Simpson – everyone,
that is, apart from the King’s own subjects, most of whom were still completely in the
dark. For an Englishman abroad, it could be rather embarrassing. Noël Coward, who
was in Washington, took the audacious step of writing to Dickie to ask him to sort it out.
‘It is impossible to pick up any paper here without feeling sick’, he wrote. ‘I am only
writing to you on a sort of hunch that … you might conceivably be able to bring a little
personal influence to bear.’85
The Mountbattens refrained from intervening directly until 1 December, when Dickie
wrote David an impassioned and supportive letter.86 It made no di erence. Ten days
later, for the rst time in history, a King voluntarily abdicated the British throne. On the
evening of 9 December, Edward VIII called his brothers – the Dukes of York, Kent and
Gloucester – and his cousin Lord Louis Mountbatten to Fort Belvedere, his country house.
Mountbatten’s valet remembered his master emerging: ‘His face was ashen and his lips
taut … we returned to London without conversation.’87
After twenty-four hours of hectic squabbling over money, poor, stuttering Bertie, Duke
of York, prepared to take the throne as King George VI, with the air of one condemned.
‘I feel,’ he said, ‘like the proverbial sheep being led to the slaughter, which is not a
comfortable feeling.’88 It was said that he collapsed and sobbed for an hour in
Marlborough House while David wound up his reign, with their mother Queen Mary

attempting to calm him down.
While the BBC prepared to introduce him on the radio as Mr Edward Windsor, a title
was hastily invented and bestowed upon the ex-King Edward VIII. ‘I have found it
impossible to carry the heavy burden of responsibility and to discharge my duties as
King as I would wish to do,’ declared the new Duke of Windsor, ‘without the help and
support of the woman I love.’ Millions of people across the Empire listened to that
broadcast. Even in faraway Allahabad, Jawaharlal Nehru, his sister Nan and her
husband Ranjit Pandit were ‘glued to the radio’ at Anand Bhavan. The ex-King’s words
‘moved me very much’, admitted Nan.89 With those words, Britain was plunged into a
tumult of confusion, anger, sorrow and speculation – though very little republican
feeling. One exception to the loyalist mood was made by Edwina Mountbatten, who
shocked society by turning up to a party immediately after the event in a ‘startlingly
gay’ dress of aquamarine with a wrap of bright blue ostrich feathers. Most women were
wearing mourning outfits of black.90
After David’s abdication and exile, Dickie had to pursue an unchivalrous damagelimitation strategy, distancing himself as much as possible from the disgraced ex-King.
On 11 December – the very day of the abdication – he had written a charming and
personal letter to ‘My dear Bertie’. ‘Heartbroken as I am at David’s departure and all the
terrible trouble he has brought on us all’, he wrote, ‘I feel I must tell you how deeply I
feel for Elizabeth and you having to shoulder his responsibilities in such trying
circumstances.’91 Dickie would later gain some notoriety for turning his ship hard a’port
at top speed – but, on this occasion, it worked. On the rst day of the new year, Bertie,
reigning as King George VI, re-appointed Mountbatten as his personal naval aide-decamp, and handed him another gong, the Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian
Order. A lesson had been learned: that control is better exerted from above than from
below. Henceforth Mountbatten would switch to fostering royal protégés rather than
attempting to ingratiate himself with royal patrons.
On 1 April 1937 the Government of India Act came into force, bringing the vote to
almost 35 million people. When the election results came in, Congress, under the
presidency of Nehru, had won a great victory. The news was nowhere near as good for
the Muslim League, which failed to win any outright victories. In the Punjab, for
instance, the Unionist Party commanded the largest portion of the Muslim vote. ‘I shall
never come to the Punjab again,’ declared Jinnah; ‘it is such a hopeless place.’92
Jinnah had not expected to win overall, but he had pinned his hopes on achieving a
strong enough share of the vote that Congress would have to o er the Muslim League
seats in its cabinets. But so decisive were its majorities that Congress had no need to do
so. The British Indian civil servant Penderel Moon called Congress’s rejection of the
League at this point ‘a fatal error – the prime cause of the creation of Pakistan’.93
Congress decided that, while it continued to mistrust Britain’s intentions, it would for
once act pragmatically. Elected Congressmen were permitted to take their o ces, and
lined up to take their oaths of loyalty to the King-Emperor. Nehru’s sister, Nan Pandit,
was invited to join the cabinet in the United Provinces – becoming only the second
female cabinet minister in the British Empire.94 She remembered mumbling the oath

with the greatest disinclination. Afterwards, she looked so shaken that the Governor, Sir
Harry Haig, asked her if she was feeling all right.
‘Thank you, I’m well,’ she replied. ‘It’s just that the King is stuck in my throat.’
‘Well, you must wash him down, then,’ said a smiling Sir Harry, passing her a drink.95
But, behind the celebrating, Muslim parties all over India were taken aback at
Congress’s rejection of League participation – which, they feared, was a sign of the
Hindu arrogance that Jinnah had long been warning them about. Quickly they began to
align themselves with him. India’s Muslims were in no way homogeneous, ranging from
mystical Su s to puritanical Deobandis, and previously only a small minority would
have argued for separate Muslim representation.96 But now the very moderate Punjabi
Unionist Party joined the League; the Muslim premiers of Bengal and Assam both gave
their support, too. More important than the politicians, perhaps, was the support of
local religious leaders: the League began to attract the support of large numbers of pirs,
maulvis and maulanas. Jinnah was suddenly transformed from an electoral failure into
the champion of free Islam against Hindu dominance.
A new idea of Muslim liberation began to gather pace. In 1930, a group of Indian
Muslim students at Cambridge University, led by Choudhry Rahmat Ali, had brought out
a pamphlet called ‘Now or Never’. Ali and his colleagues set forth a demand for what
they called Pakistan – comprising the provinces and the initial letters of Punjab,
Afghania (the North West Frontier Province), Kashmir and Sind, and a ‘tan’ from
Baluchistan. In Urdu, Pakistan meant ‘land of the pure’.97 This elegant name would soon
catch on, not long after Jinnah was presented with the idea by a students’ group in the
late 1930s.
In August 1938 Jinnah met Lord Brabourne, the acting Viceroy, and o ered him a
deal. If the British recognized the League as the sole mouthpiece for Muslims, the League
would support the British. Jinnah said publicly that he was prepared to be ‘the ally of
even the devil’ if Muslim interests required it. ‘It is not because we are in love with
imperialism,’ he told the League’s annual session, ‘but in politics one has to play one’s
game as on a chessboard.’98 At the time, Brabourne saw no great advantage for the
British in Jinnah’s friendship. When war broke out the following year, that would
change.
Meanwhile Congress itself was being split again. Jawaharlal Nehru had been
President since 1935, and had spent most of 1936 travelling around India and meeting
the people he hoped to represent. He was received with a series of darshans almost
Gandhian in their fervour. Songs were composed in his honour; fantastic stories were
told of his valour and bravery. A woman in Madras created a line of toiletries called the
‘Nehru Specialities’, and sent samples to him. His vanity was slightly o ended by the
‘most disagreeable picture of mine’ branded on all the bottles, but otherwise he found
them amusing and distributed the samples of Nehru Brilliantine, Nehru Pomade, and
Nehru Lime Juice & Glycerine among his friends.99 Pamphleteers and orators called him
‘Bharat Bhushan’ (‘Jewel of India’) and ‘Tyagamurti’ (‘O, Embodiment of Sacri ce’) –
nicknames which were gleefully picked up by his family. ‘When Bhai [Brother] came
down to breakfast we bowed deeply and asked how the Jewel of India had slept, or if

the Embodiment of Sacrifice would like some bacon and eggs,’ remembered Betty.100 The
reaction of the chosen one to all this acclaim was characteristically self-deprecating. ‘It
went to my head, intoxicated me a little, and gave me con dence and strength. I
became (I imagine so, for it is a di cult task to look at oneself from outside) just a little
bit autocratic in my ways, just a shade dictatorial.’101
By the time that the question of his potential re-election came up in 1937, there were
serious rumblings about where exactly Nehru was leading Congress. The most persuasive
of these was an extraordinary piece published in the Modern Review at the time, entitled
‘The Rashtrapati’ (President). It described Nehru as a godlike gure, moving through
multitudes as their serene and natural leader; then turned to criticism of how this
adoration had spoiled the man. ‘What lies behind that mask of his, what desires, what
will to power, what insatiate longings?’ it asked.
Men like Jawaharlal, with all their capacity for great and good work, are unsafe in democracy. He calls himself a
democrat and a socialist, and no doubt he does so in all earnestness, but every psychologist knows that the mind is
ultimately a slave to the heart and logic can always be made to t in with the desires and irrepressible urges of a
person. A little twist and Jawahar might turn a dictator sweeping aside the paraphernalia of a slow-moving
democracy … His conceit is already formidable. It must be checked. We want no Caesars.102
This powerful vili cation was published under the pseudonym ‘Chanakya’, after an
ancient political philosopher, and caused great outrage among Nehru’s loyal followers.
What they did not realize was that ‘Chanakya’ was actually Jawaharlal Nehru himself.
To ensure secrecy, he had submitted the piece via Padmaja Naidu, who had become his
lover and con dante after Kamala’s death. In Nehru’s writing, there is no piece more
telling of his personality than ‘The Rashtrapati’. Introspection, honesty, wit and
mischief: few other politicians in history could have written such a lucid essay in selfdeconstruction.
But the opposition to Nehru in Congress consisted of more than himself. While he was
touring India, the party had been reshaped by the ascendancy of the extreme right-wing
Subhas Chandra Bose, and the return of the increasingly erratic Gandhi. Gandhi disliked
Bose, but, with Nehru again in Europe, had accepted him as the President of Congress
for 1938. Bose soon made an unambiguous statement that he meant to impose a
deadline for the British to leave India – after which, if they were still there, he would
abandon the principles of non-violence. A horri ed Gandhi tried to persuade Nehru to
return, oust Bose and take over, but Nehru refused to interfere. Bose stood rm, and
won a shock victory against Gandhi’s candidate, the little-known provincial politician
Pattabhi Sitaramayya.
Bose was carried away with his own remarkable triumph over the Mahatma. He
started calling himself Netaji – ‘dear leader’ – in a deliberate imitation of Adolf Hitler’s
title, ‘Führer’. In February 1939, twelve members of the Congress Working Committee
resigned and Bose was left politically adrift. He was e ectively beaten into resignation
by May. With his brother Sarat he retreated to Bengal, where they formed their own
party, the Forward Bloc. Though banned from leaving the country by the British

authorities, he escaped Calcutta in January 1941 disguised as a Pathan. Via a daring
dash through Afghanistan and Moscow, he found his way to Germany under an Italian
passport in the name of Orlando Mazzotta.103 And Germany, in 1941, was where the
attention of the whole world was focused.

CHAPTER 7: POWER WITHOUT RESPONSIBILITY

ON 1 SEPTEMBER 1939, HITLER’S ARMIES INVADED POLAND. Three days later, the Viceroy, by then Lord
Linlithgow, summoned Gandhi and Jinnah. The Indian leaders demonstrated how
seriously they took this faraway war by bickering over whether they should go in
Gandhi’s or Jinnah’s car to the meeting, a scrap which Jinnah, for what it was worth,
won.1 The Viceroy did not take their contribution seriously, either. He informed them
that India had already declared war on Germany – without their approval.2
Gandhi’s position on non-violence was absolute. Aggression could never be returned.
He did not believe that women should resist rape, but preferred that they should ‘defeat’
their assailants by remaining passive and silent.3 Correspondingly, he did not believe
that the victims of war should resist attackers by physical force, but rather ought to o er
satyagraha – that is, non-compliance with the invaders. ‘If there ever could be a
justi able war in the name of and for humanity, war against Germany to prevent the
wanton persecution of a whole race would be completely justi ed,’ he wrote. ‘But I do
not believe in any war.’ He advised the British to give up the ght against Hitler and
Mussolini: ‘Let them take possession of your beautiful island … allow yourself, man,
woman and child, to be slaughtered, but you will refuse to owe allegiance to them.’4
Furthermore, in one of his most controversial arguments, Gandhi advised the Jews in
Germany to o er passive resistance to the Nazi regime – and to give up their own lives
as sacrifices.5 He told the Jews to pray for Adolf Hitler. ‘If even one Jew acted thus,’ he
wrote, ‘he would salve his self respect and leave an example which, if it became
infectious, would save the whole of Jewry and leave a rich heritage to mankind
besides.’6
Gandhi compounded this error of judgement by o ering praise to Hitler. ‘I do not
consider Herr Hitler to be as bad as he is depicted’, he wrote in May 1940. ‘He is
showing an ability that is amazing and he seems to be gaining his victories without
much bloodshed’.7 Apparently, he saw some parallel between his own e orts to return
India to the Indians, and Hitler’s invasion of French territory to reclaim that lost to
Germany under the terms of the Treaty of Versailles at the end of the First World War.
He regretted that Hitler had employed war rather than non-violence to achieve his aims,
but nonetheless averred that the Germans of the future ‘will honour Herr Hitler as a
genius, a brave man, a matchless organizer and much more.’8
Louis Fischer brought up this subject with Gandhi in 1946. By that time, the
concentration camps had been discovered, and the true, awful extent of the Holocaust
revealed. It might have been expected that the benefit of hindsight would have tempered
the old man’s views. It had not. ‘Hitler killed ve million Jews,’ Gandhi told Fischer. ‘It
is the greatest crime of our time. But the Jews should have o ered themselves to the

butcher’s knife. They should have thrown themselves into the sea from cli s … As it is
they succumbed anyway in their millions.’9
Gandhi’s ambivalence towards the Nazis was matched by his feelings about the
Japanese. Roosevelt’s personal envoy to India, Louis Johnson, was dismayed. ‘Gandhi
appeared to him to favour Japan,’ a British diplomat reported to London, ‘under the
impression that if the English were out of the way, India could make an agreement with
Japan.’10 Gandhi may have favoured Japan; certainly Bose did; but there was one man
at the centre of Congress politics who consistently opposed the Axis powers. Nehru’s
steadfast opposition to fascism marked him out from his comrades. He was advised by
them to tone it down, for in the event of a Japanese conquest of India he would
undoubtedly su er for his forthrightness: his response was to speak out louder. ‘Hitler
and Japan must go to hell,’ he declared. ‘I shall ght them to the end and this is my
policy. I shall also ght Mr Subhas Bose and his party along with Japan if he comes to
India.’11
On 14 September Congress issued a demand for total independence, which was
ignored. A month later, Linlithgow announced that it was ‘unthinkable’ to proceed
without consulting the Muslims, and reiterated the o er of dominion status for India
somewhere in the unspeci ed future.12 Some said that the Viceroy had deliberately
insulted Congress in order to force its ministers to resign from the government.13 If so, it
worked. On 10 November, they all left o ce. Jinnah declared a ‘Deliverance Day’ from
the ‘tyranny, oppression, and injustice’ of Congress, provoking an outburst from Nehru –
which mattered very little, for he had resigned. Gandhi mourned the loss of Hindu–
Muslim cooperation, without which he saw ‘no real freedom for India’.14
If the Viceroy was out to sabotage Congress, he would have pleased the new Prime
Minister, Winston Churchill, who took o ce on 10 May 1940. Churchill’s reactionary
stance on India was so extreme that it depressed even committed imperialists like his
India Secretary, Leo Amery. Had Nehru been privy to Churchill’s cabinet orations, all his
worst fears about the British policy of divide and rule would have been con rmed.
Churchill described Hindu–Muslim antagonism as ‘a bulwark of British rule in India’,
and noted that, were it to be resolved, their concord would result in ‘the united
communities joining in showing us the door’.15
Divide and rule had worked exceptionally well. Both sides now hated each other even
more than they hated the British. But perhaps it had worked too well: the last thing the
British wanted on their hands was a civil war. Shortly before Churchill came to o ce,
the Muslim League had, for the rst time, voted in favour of a separate state of
Pakistan. Jinnah was acclaimed as the ‘Quaid-e-Azam’, or ‘great leader’, for his
championing of this policy. It was said that he had told a few close associates that the
demand for Pakistan was a ‘tactical move’, rather than a serious aim.16 Either way, it
served to stir up trouble. Tara Singh, a Sikh radical, immediately declared that ‘If the
Muslim League wants to establish Pakistan they will have to pass through an ocean of
Sikh blood.’17
Nehru, meanwhile, was in prison again at Dehra Dun at the foot of the Himalayas. He
spent his time planting an English country garden of sweet peas and nasturtiums, and

over the course of nine months spun 112,500 yards of yarn – some of which Indira
would wear as her wedding sari, in place of the usual silk.18 He had nightmares about
being cornered by an oppressive force. In his dreams, he tried to cry out, but could not;
in reality, the sleeping Jawahar howled, terrifying his fellow inmates.19 Congress’s
campaign for a free India was going nowhere.
Dickie Mountbatten’s war was going better than Jawaharlal Nehru’s, although only on
the surface. ‘Thank God I’m not a German’, he had written in 1937 to his cousin Prince
Louis of Hesse, who was.20 He was put in charge of a destroyer, HMS Kelly. It was,
according to his valet, ‘a moment he treasured almost as much as the birth of his two
daughters’ – but in the case of the ship there ensued a catalogue of misadventures.21
Returning from a botched expedition to rescue another British ship, Mountbatten was
thrashing the Kelly through a turbulent North Sea at twice the usual speed when he
ordered a swift change of direction. The Kelly rolled fty degrees, losing all the boats,
davits and rails on the starboard side, as well as an unfortunate stoker.22 A few weeks
later, the Kelly was in the Tyne estuary, when Mountbatten – obeying orders – sailed it
into the middle of a mine eld. It was a British one, but no less explosive for that;
Mountbatten promptly smacked into a mine, and his ship went into port for one of its
regular repair-jobs.23 During a blizzard on 9 March 1940, a fearful grating was heard
aboard as something tore through the Kelly‘s bows. Mountbatten, perhaps with some
self-knowledge, had primed his radio operators to send the immediate signal ‘Have been
hit by mine or torpedo. Am uncertain which’ in such an eventuality. HMS Gurkha sent
back the laconic ‘That was not mine but me’ – the Kelly had, in fact, struck another
British ship.24 Exactly two months later, Mountbatten found himself o the coast of
Holland, after getting distracted in pursuit of a U-boat. It was not long before the
Germans found him there, too, owing to his overzealous use of signalling lights. He
stopped when he saw the wake of a torpedo streaking through the water towards his
ship. ‘That’s going to kill an awful lot of chaps,’ he remembered thinking; twenty-seven,
in fact, though the ship was prevented from sinking.25 During the six months it took to
repair the Kelly after this incident, Mountbatten was put in charge of HMS Javelin, which
had its bow and stern blown o and forty-six of its crew killed when he sped past a
German otilla too noisily, attracting torpedo re; and then compounded the error by
swinging round to port, presenting the largest possible target.26
The Kelly was constantly in and out of the dockyards. Soon after one of these patchups, a young naval o cer called Terry Healey watched Mountbatten ram the newly
restored Kelly straight into the bows of another British ship. Terry’s brother, Denis,
would end up being Mountbatten’s senior at the Ministry of Defence two decades later,
where he would often recall the story. ‘He had to have his own bows repaired all over
again,’ Denis Healey remembered; ‘but his birth saved him from the court martial any
other officer would have faced.’27
It was not only Mountbatten’s birth that was on his side, but a tremendous amount of
luck. In 1941, the Kelly – along with HMS Kashmir – was sent to attack Crete, where the

Germans had acquired a British air eld. The ships did so in the early hours of 23 May,
allowing British troops to retake the air eld, but attracting a swarm of twenty-four
Junkers dive-bombers. ‘Christ, look at that lot,’ Mountbatten was heard to remark.28 It
took just two minutes for the bombers to sink the Kashmir, and only a couple more for
the Kelly to follow it. Mountbatten, who had vowed never to abandon ship, remained on
the bridge. The ship abandoned him – plunging Mountbatten violently into the brine. He
dragged himself under the bridge screen by using his tin hat as a weight.
‘I started swallowing water,’ he remembered later. ‘I knew I’d be nished if I couldn’t
stop this so I put my left hand over my mouth and nose and held them shut. Then I
thought my lungs would burst. Finally I began to see daylight and suddenly shot out of
the water like a cork released.’29 Mountbatten and his fellow survivors swam around in
the churning waters, slicked with fuel oil and strafed with machine-gun re from the
bombers above, dragging their injured comrades aboard rafts. The captain led three
cheers for the Kelly as its hull nally sank beneath the surface. HMS Kipling, another
British ship from Mountbatten’s otilla, appeared at this opportune moment. One
hundred and thirty-six souls had been lost, but 128 survived. The next day, an oil-soaked
Mountbatten came ashore in Egypt, to be greeted by his nephew Philip with the
characteristically distasteful exclamation: ‘You look like a nigger minstrel!’30
Back at home in London, Mountbatten’s celebrity friends were on tenterhooks – or, at
least, one of them was. ‘Very worried on reading in paper that HMS Kelly sunk o
Crete’, wrote Noël Coward in his diary. ‘Feared Dickie Mountbatten lost. Rang up
Ministry of Information. Found that he had been saved. Very relieved.’31 A little over
ve weeks later, Coward went to a screening of Down Argentine Way with Dickie and
Edwina. Afterwards, they dined at the Mountbattens’ house in Chester Street, and
Coward was treated to the full story of the Kelly‘s sinking. If Dickie was anything, he
was a world-class yarn-spinner – and Coward was smitten. ‘Absolutely heart-breaking
and so magni cent,’ he gushed. ‘He [Dickie] told the whole saga without frills and with
a sincerity that was very moving. He is a pretty wonderful man, I think.’32 Less than
three weeks later, he told Dickie of his idea to make a lm based on the sinking of the
Kelly. Mountbatten was delighted, and immediately promised the support of the
Admiralty.33 And that was how the British government ended up nancing a very odd
movie indeed – one of the few propaganda lms in history to show the heroes su ering
a disastrous routing by a stronger and more competent enemy.
Coward and Mountbatten got together at Broadlands to work on the script, and both
men were in their element: Coward pretending to be a naval o cer, and Mountbatten
pretending to be a showman. ‘I am purposely making it as little like you as possible’,
wrote Coward to Mountbatten. ‘My Captain (D) is quite ordinary with an income of
about £800 a year, a small country house in Plymouth, a reasonably nice looking wife
(Mrs. not Lady), two children and a cocker spaniel.’34 The cocker spaniel was neither
here nor there, for ‘Captain Edward Kinross’ was to be given Mountbatten’s character
intact and his speeches verbatim, and would even wear Mountbatten’s own cap at the
correct jaunty angle.35
The Ministry of Information soon decided that a lm about a British ship being sunk

would be bad publicity. It withdrew its support. Coward rang up Mountbatten;
Mountbatten took the script directly to the King and Queen; something unknown
occurred; the Ministry’s support was mysteriously reinstated.36 All the opposition that
came up during lming was dealt with according to a similar protocol. Making his debut
as a sailor was actor Richard Attenborough. ‘He was a showman,’ Attenborough later
said of Mountbatten. ‘He had a wonderful sense of the theatrical drama, and of course
he was incredibly good looking, and in his naval uniform, I mean, he was everybody’s
idea of a major movie star.’37 But Mountbatten was not the movie star: that was the
shorter and stouter Coward, and consequently In Which We Serve is one of the few lms
in which an actor playing a real-life character is less good-looking than the genuine
article. Even so, Coward did his best to act up to his subject’s reputation. His Kinross,
like Mountbatten, ingratiates himself with his men by demonstrating a crystal-clear
memory for their names and achievements. Celia Johnson, as his wife, shared with Lady
Louis a witty and opinionated character as well as a striking physical resemblance. A
lengthy and emotional speech about competing with a ship for her husband’s a ections
would have been familiar to the real Edwina. Meanwhile, the real Dickie ensured that
real sailors on leave played all the extras.38
In Which We Serve was premiered on 17 September 1942, to rapturous reviews.
Coward won an honorary Academy Award for ‘outstanding achievement in production’
at the 1943 Oscars; the lm was nominated for Best Picture the following year, but lost
to Casablanca. On 27 October 1942, Coward received a letter from Dickie ‘embodying a
suggestion from his cousin’.39 The cousin was King George VI, and the suggestion a
knighthood. The profoundly royalist Coward admitted himself ‘ ung into a frenzy’. He
would accept, of course, he replied to Dickie: ‘I only wish secretly that it could be a little
di erent from the usual award on account of that particular accolade having fallen
rather into disrepute lately through being so very indiscriminately bestowed.’40 As it
turned out, knighthoods were not so very indiscriminately bestowed, for Coward’s was
blocked (by Churchill, he thought) before it could be made official.41
Dickie’s wartime adventures left Edwina alone in London and, for the rst time, able to
nd a role that ful lled her ambition. Her father, the Conservative minister Lord Mount
Temple, had been one of those Britons who found the disciplined machismo of Nazi
Germany all too seductive by the middle 1930s, when he had with lamentable timing
founded the Anglo-German Fellowship. Edwina, whose love for her Jewish maternal
grandfather had far outshone the distant relationship she had with Mount Temple, did
not nd Hitler’s politics appealing. She paid for many of her German Jewish relatives to
escape to London, and installed them in suites at the Ritz.42 The satisfaction that came
from making a practical di erence changed her life. She volunteered for the St John
Ambulance Brigade in October 1940, and spent many nights visiting air-raid shelters,
particularly in Stepney and around the East End. A St John lieutenant remembered that
on Edwina’s night tours of shelters ‘her hat was at just the right angle, and there was
never a hair out of place. She’d go down into those lthy shelters, so dainty and clean

herself, with a smile for everybody; and you should have seen their faces light up.’43 But
Edwina did more than just waft around impressing Cockneys with her personal
grooming. She inspected shelters thoroughly, noting anything from a missing light bulb
to a total absence of lavatories, and then lobbied o cials and government ministers
tirelessly over every detail. Her technique for improving standards was a combination of
feminine wiles and outright bullying: she would utter her eyelashes one minute as
shamelessly as she might pull rank the next. But she could not be ignored. She also
began to talk in increasingly anti-colonialist and even anti-capitalist tones.44 Edwina’s
upper-crust friends generally dismissed these views as affectations. The Conservative MP
Chips Channon had a drink with the Mountbattens and the King of Greece at the
Dorchester on 25 February 1942, and noted that ‘Edwina M – is now a complete
Socialist, which for anybody in the position of a millionairess, a semi-royalty, and a
famous fashionable gure, is too ridiculous.’ Ridiculous or not, it was evidently doing
her, and her marriage, no harm. ‘She looked a dream of beauty and seemed fond of
Dickie.’45 They were getting on better than ever, perhaps because they rarely saw each
other more than once or twice a week. Richard Hough, to whom Mountbatten spoke
openly about his marriage, wrote: ‘They certainly never went to bed together; that had
ceased years ago. When they did meet it would be on some formal occasion or, like a
divorced couple, at weddings or funerals.’46
In October 1941, the Prime Minister, Winston Churchill, had recalled Mountbatten
from a tour of the United States, where he had been attempting to charm the Americans
into the war. Churchill was nostalgic for the fast-receding days of Britain’s supremacy,
and its embodiment in famous men. He would speak in reverential tones of his ‘great
ancestor’, by whom he meant the Duke of Marlborough who had trounced Louis XIV’s
armies at Blenheim, Ramillies and Oudenaarde. In Mountbatten, he saw resurrected
many of Marlborough’s virtues: fearlessness, patriotism, chiselled features, aristocratic
breeding, an easy rapport with women. Over the next year, it would become clear that
Marlborough, Churchill and Mountbatten shared another trait: their love of the grand
gesture, untempered by concern for human lives.
Churchill wished to install Mountbatten in a new position as Adviser on Combined
Operations. Mountbatten demurred, saying that he would prefer to remain in the Navy.
‘Have you no sense of glory?’ Churchill replied. ‘I o er you a chance to take part in the
highest direction of the war and all you want is to go back to sea. What could you hope
to achieve except to be sunk in a bigger and more expensive ship?’47 Mountbatten gave
in and, on 4 March 1942, was promoted to Chief of Combined Operations.
It had been a giddy ascendancy. Before transferring to Combined Operations,
Mountbatten been a mere Captain in the Navy, commanding a small eet of destroyers.
Churchill’s promotion gave him the acting ranks of Vice-Admiral of the Navy,
Lieutenant-General of the Army and Air Marshal of the Royal Air Force. The Chiefs of
Sta , men of far greater strategic experience than their new peer, regarded him as a
dangerously callow upstart – and supposed he had only been promoted as Churchill’s
pet.48

The plan was for Combined Operations to annoy Hitler as much as possible along his
north-western front, mainly to distract the German Army from the then more critical
front in the east. Mountbatten’s appointment was largely political, a sop to the
Americans and the Russians.49 General Dwight D. Eisenhower turned up in London in
May 1942 and speci cally requested that Mountbatten be made commander of a
putative invasion of France. ‘In America I have heard of a man … his name is Admiral
Mountbatten,’ he told the Chiefs of Sta . ‘I have heard that Admiral Mountbatten is
vigorous, intelligent and courageous, and if the operation is to be staged originally with
British forces predominating, I assume he could do the job.’ Sir Alan Brooke eventually
broke the frosty silence that followed by pointing out, ‘General, possibly you have not
met Admiral Mountbatten. This is he, sitting directly across the table from you.’50
Eisenhower gamely supported Mountbatten’s candidacy even after he had met him. It
was not such a bad appointment. A big, obvious ourish was needed, rather than
military success – and, when one needed a big, obvious ourish, the man to call for was
Mountbatten.
The raid on the French port of Dieppe, which was planned from April 1942, was an
experiment. It had become a truism in Allied Command that any invasion of northern
France via the English Channel would have to begin by securing two or three major
ports, ideally without wrecking them. Dieppe, a smallish port on the Normandy coast,
was to serve as a test case.
The location being settled, there followed two months of fa ng, squabbling, buckpassing and indecision, the curses of Combined Operations. Too many high-ranking
individuals had a say in the planning, but the attention from most of them was
intermittent. Insofar as there was a commander at all, it was the unproven
Mountbatten. He rst planned to land forces on either side of Dieppe and attack in a
pincer movement. General Bernard ‘Monty’ Montgomery told him atly that this plan
was amateur, and he ought to go for a frontal assault as well. Mountbatten caved under
the weight of the senior man’s scorn. Next he planned that the raid be preceded by air
strikes, a provision to which Churchill agreed on 1 June. But Mountbatten missed the
next crucial meeting a few days later by being in Washington, and in his absence the
idea was dropped. This pattern continued. Plans for big-gun support by a battleship or a
pair of cruisers were dropped in favour of an ine ectual otilla of little destroyers.
Plans to use a small force of about 500 experienced Marines and commandos were
dropped in favour of a massive force of 5000 newly imported Canadian troops, who had
never been trained for an amphibious operation, on the grounds that their government
was keen to get them into the field.51
The rst rehearsal took place at Bridport on 13 June, and was a shambles, with men
being seasick, tanks being lost and troops landing in the wrong place.52 The second, on
23 June, was more coherent, though not much. The operation was scheduled for the next
clear day. Almost as if the heavens themselves were warning the raid o , there followed
three weeks of the lthiest weather the Channel could throw up. The Chiefs of Sta
began to realize – correctly, as it later transpired – that the Germans must have worked
out what they were up to by this point, not least because every one of the 10,000 Allied

troops selected to take part had been told.53 On 8 July Montgomery recommended that
the whole thing be called o . The idea might never have been seen again, had not
Mountbatten brightly suggested that they relaunch the operation six weeks later, still
aiming at Dieppe – setting up the ultimate elaborate double-bluff.
This madcap plan was met with disbelief by the Chiefs of Sta . Mountbatten was
apparently able to win over these august strategists with the argument that – in his
words – ‘the very last thing they’d ever imagine is that we would be so stupid as to lay
on the same operation again.’54 His charm was, as Jawaharlal Nehru would later
remark, dangerous.
At 5 a.m. on 19 August 1942, a group of commandos landed on either side of Dieppe,
while a frontal assault by Canadian troops came straight at the beach. The commandos
to the west achieved their objective; those to the east, partially so. The bombardment of
the front failed, and all parts of the operation ran hopelessly late. The main body of
troops approached the beach an hour and a half after the Germans had realized they
were being attacked. Captain Denis Whitaker, of the Royal Hamilton Light Infantry,
remembered the moment when they realized that the bombardment had had no impact
on the town’s defences. Where they had been expecting devastation and rubble,
unbroken window panes shone in the morning sun. The situation was worse than they
knew. The fty-three tanks that had been supposed to cover them had not arrived, and
every German post was fully manned and ready.
The men who mounted the beach walked into a killing eld. German machine guns
picked o scores of Allied troops before they even landed. Those that did staggered but
a few steps before being hit by tracer re and mortar bombs. Heaps of bodies piled up
as the men fell, those behind wading through seawater scarlet with the freshly spilled
blood of their fellows. All around them, bullets whacked into arms, legs and stomachs
with dizzying e ciency. The beach o ered no cover: infantrymen attempted to jam
themselves into the shallow pools left by the sea behind jagged rocks, to little avail.
Around half of the tanks eventually arrived; several promptly threw their treads on the
sharp stones of the beach. Those men who attempted to get out and repair them were
cut down in a hail of fire.
Back in the destroyers, the situation was uncertain. Lieutenant Dan Doheny was sent
ashore for a recce. He arrived amid the carnage and jumped for cover behind a tank to
see his friend Lieutenant John Counsell. ‘It’s an awful F.U.,’ Counsell said. ‘They were
waiting for us. They knew we were coming.’ As he said this he pitched forward into
Doheny, a bullet in his back. Stretcher-bearers swiftly ran out of bandages and
morphine. The rst landing craft that tried to get to the beach to evacuate survivors was
swarmed. So many of the troops piling on to it were shot in their attempt to get up the
ramp that the doors would not close; it sank, captain and crew killed. At 9.40 a.m., the
withdrawal signal was sent through, and attempts to get the remaining men on the
beach back to the otilla began. They took what shelter they could as bomber squadrons
from the RAF, RCAF and the Luftwa e lled the air. Planes dropped from the sky: 106
were downed (against only 48 of the Luftwa e), and 60 pilots killed. At twenty minutes
past noon, the ships turned back for Britain in tattered disarray.55

All the brave e orts of the men on the beach had been in vain. Without air support,
without proper cover from tanks, without the timely arrival of the pincer-movement
commandos, and without the advantage of surprise, they had been doomed. Not one
man got as far as the centre of the town. More than 2000 were left behind to be taken
prisoner, and watched their own eet turn tail. Meanwhile, the tide came in, drowning
many of the gasping soldiers who still lay wounded on the beach. A few managed to
pull themselves out of its reach, and bled to death on higher ground. Their wretched
deaths brought the total killed to over 1000 men. The Canadian troops su ered a
horrifying rate of 65 per cent casualties.56 Hundreds of bodies, riddled with German
bullets, were washed out to sea by the gentle swell of the waves.
Mountbatten, Churchill and Eisenhower attempted to put the best possible gloss on
this catastrophe. But it is Mountbatten who has borne most of the opprobrium. His
apologists shift the blame on to Montgomery’s admittedly poor advice, or speculate that
the outcome would have been the same whoever was in charge. But such a defence is in
the worst taste. Mountbatten was an inexperienced and overcon dent commander, with
a known propensity for taking risks. And, even if some of the planning decisions cannot
be pinned on him, he was unquestionably responsible for the asco of the intelligence
operation. After he had arrived at Combined Operations he had lled its o ces with his
cronies, who swiftly became known as the ‘Dickie Birds’. Harold Wernher, brother-inlaw of Dickie’s brother George, had been put in charge of supply chain management;
Peter Murphy, Dickie’s sometime live-in chum, headed up a nebulous o ce considering
political rami cations of military a airs; and Bobby, the Marquis de Casa Maury, an
occasional racing driver who managed the Curzon Cinema in Mayfair, had been made
Head of Intelligence. Some of the Dickie Birds got on all right with their tasks; others did
not.57 Bobby Casa Maury was one of the latter sort. He got everything wrong in his
assessment of Dieppe. He had reported that Dieppe’s defences were puny; they turned
out to be comprehensive. He had said that the defending force was one battalion of the
110th division of the German Army, headquartered in Arques-la-Bataille, four miles
south of Dieppe; this was impressively wrong on three counts, for the real defence was a
regiment (comprising three battalions), headquartered at Envermeu, six miles from
Arques, and it was of the 302nd division. The 110th had been at the Russian front since
the war began.58 This information was not di cult to nd. The description of Dieppe’s
defences that appeared in the New York Times on 20 August 1942, taken from old
newswire reports, was signi cantly more accurate than the one prepared by Casa
Maury for the operation itself.59
Mountbatten must also take the blame for the loss of the crucial element of surprise in
the operation. It was he who had suggested the double-blu : and, despite his o cial
biographer’s insistence that the Germans knew nothing about the plan to attack Dieppe
speci cally, it was well-known in the German Army that the Allies might be planning a
Channel raid of some sort. The German commanding o cer in Dieppe had actually
received a report that the combination of dawn and high tide on 19 August might be
chosen for such a raid.60 Even had the Germans not been on high alert, the plan for the
operation contained a crucial weakness, to which Mountbatten’s attention had been

drawn. Troops landing on the beach needed to surprise the Germans, which would be
impossible if the two anking pincer raids had already landed at local villages half an
hour before, and bombardment from the British destroyers on the town had commenced
five minutes before.61
Mountbatten himself repeatedly attempted to dodge the blame, and even to
propagate the feeble and insulting ction that the sacri ce of over 1000 young men was
a great boon to the commanders rather than a result of their incompetent planning.
Useful lessons were showcased at Dieppe, but many of them could equally have been
learned from books, or indeed – for Mountbatten was not partial to books, unless they
were about genealogy or polo – by asking Churchill about what had happened at
Gallipoli.62 Furthermore, all of the mistakes made had been suggested at the planning
stage before Dieppe, or were apparent from the rehearsals. Mountbatten was happy to
accept the attractive titles and smart uniforms of high o ce, but reluctant to take the
responsibility along with the power.
On 15 February 1942 the Allies – and Britain in particular – had received a devastating
shock when the supposedly ‘unconquerable’ Singapore was taken by the Japanese.
Singapore’s huge guns pointed out to sea, and were mounted in concrete; the Japanese
simply went around the back and attacked from the land. The parallel with Lawrence of
Arabia’s capture of Aqaba in 1917, one of the most famous escapades in British military
history, is so strong that it seems extraordinary that a British command would not have
anticipated such an approach. Yet it did not. Without ring a single shot, Colonel Hunt
surrendered with 60,000 troops of the Indian Army.63
This brought Japan right up to India’s doorstep, threatening British interests on a new
and potentially devastating front. ‘If the Japanese adopt a bold policy,’ the Joint
Planners warned Churchill, ‘we are in real danger of losing our Indian Empire – with
incalculable consequences to the future conduct of the war.’64 The old man reacted
instantly when stung in his Indian Empire. Until then, the British had not bothered to
improve upon their o er of dominion status with a date or a constitution. But whether
or not they planned on keeping India, they could not lose it to the Japanese; and its
defence could be facilitated by some form of cooperation from Indian politicians.
Meanwhile, Churchill was under attack domestically and internationally for his
reactionary stance on Indian freedom. The Labour leader, Attlee, told Churchill his
views were ‘not widely shared’, and that imperialist braggadocio was ‘fatally shortsighted and suicidal’.65 Roosevelt leant on him harder still.66
Besieged on all sides, even Churchill had to accept that only some sort of settlement
would satisfy the Americans and result in a useful war e ort from the Indians. Just three
weeks after the Japanese took Singapore, he sent Labour MP Sir Sta ord Cripps to
Delhi. In India, the march to independence had been milling about pointlessly for so
long that its leaders were completely taken aback.
Cripps arrived in India on 22 March 1942. Gandhi met him, and soon deduced that
the Mission intended to o er a straightforward bargain. Britain was prepared to o er

India dominion status after the war, in exchange for the main parties giving their full
support to the Allies while it lasted. Protesting that he was unwilling to participate in
violence, Gandhi withdrew to his ashram. Nehru took over negotiations, for he was
prepared to ght Japan if it would result in an agreement. But Cripps’s eventual o er
soured his ambivalence into dissatisfaction. Heavy concessions to the princely states,
and a voting system weighted by caste and creed, would deprive Congress of overall
control. Furthermore, dissenting provinces would be permitted to leave the Indian
Union.
Gandhi may not have been negotiating, but he kept an eye on Nehru’s actions. He
feared that the policy was a deliberate attempt once again to divide and rule, which
would ultimately lead to the ‘Balkanization’ of India; consequently, he put pressure on
Congress to reject it; consequently, they did.67 The Muslim League rejected it too, for it
did not speci cally designate a Pakistan – but the o er was a vindication for Jinnah’s
strategy. The right of Muslim provinces to stay out of a Congress-dominated India had
been acknowledged. In the course of just twelve years, Pakistan had gone from
decorative acronym to a feasible prospect for millions of Muslims.68
The failure of the Cripps mission was disappointing in India. But it was just as
devastating in Whitehall. A rash deal had been made in 1940, whereby Britain assumed
a heavy burden of nancial responsibility for the defence of India. The Chancellor
began to predict Indian sterling balances – the amount e ectively owed by Britain to
India – rising as high as £400 million, even £450 million, by April 1943; and no ceiling
was in sight.69 By the end of 1944, the balances were so large that economist John
Maynard Keynes thought that it might be necessary to take another large loan, or a gift,
from the United States to cover them.70 Few were under any illusions about what the
conditions might include. Lord Beaverbrook expressed the opinion of many in Whitehall
when he said that, ‘It would be better to pay India a considerable tribute rather than
permit the United States to intrude into the a airs of that country.’ 71 The United States
had taken little interest in India until the rise of Gandhi had made it interesting. But,
owing to the Americans’ own long memory of colonial rule, as well as the nation’s
principles of liberty and democracy, there was a general feeling against empires – and
against the British Empire in particular.
Churchill’s trenchant refusal to give up on the Empire was leaving him increasingly
isolated. By 1942, even the Viceroy was thinking in terms of an exit strategy. ‘We are
not going to remain in India,’ Linlithgow told the American journalist Louis Fischer. ‘Of
course, Congress does not believe this. But we will not stay here. We are preparing for
our departure.’72

CHAPTER 8: A NEW THEATRE

IN JUNE 1942, LOUIS FISCHER SPENT A WEEK AT GANDHI’S ashram, and observed the preparations for a
new campaign under the slogan ‘Quit India’. The slogan was not only catchy, but
accurate: the British administration was to be harried, disobeyed and besieged until it
simply upped and left, war or no war, economy or no economy, responsibility or no
responsibility. The Quit India resolution, passed by Congress on 8 August 1942,
announced that Congress would ‘no longer [be] justi ed in holding the nation back from
endeavouring to assert its will’ against the British administration, and sanctioned ‘a
mass struggle on non-violent lines under the inevitable leadership of Gandhiji’.1 The
struggle would only begin at Gandhi’s word; but this was a call for treason as far as the
British were concerned. The rst arrests were made in the early hours of the morning of
9 August.
Over the following days, India exploded in violent uprisings, described by the Viceroy,
Lord Linlithgow, as the ‘most serious since that of 1857’.2 There were Quit India hartals
across the country, which turned into riots. The police and the army fought back, often
brutally, leaving an o cial civilian death toll of 1028; bazaar gossip put the total at
25,000.3 E ectively, Congress had given the raj an excuse to imprison hundreds of its
leaders, including Gandhi himself and Nehru – who, according to his sister, was almost
thankful for it, so uncomfortable had he felt opposing the war e ort. 4 The resolution
could never have succeeded. Britain could not evacuate India in the middle of the
Second World War, with Japan looming on its eastern front. But the empty space
created in politics by the Congress leaders being in prison gave the Muslim League its
chance to rush in.
According to Jinnah, it was not in the interests of the Muslims for the British to
abandon them in a potentially hostile swamp of Hinduism.5 The logical position of the
League was actually to keep the British in India – at least for as long as it took to
convince them of the case for Pakistan, and perhaps inde nitely. The e ect of Gandhi’s
Quit India misstep, and the League’s hugely successful campaign during the 1940s, can
be seen from the election statistics. In the general election of 1945–6, the Muslim
League would win about 75 per cent of all Muslim votes. In every previous election, its
share of the Muslim vote had hovered around 4.6 per cent.6 During the war years,
Gandhi and Congress handed Jinnah a sixteenfold increase in his support. Quit India
damaged the chances of a united India at least as much as any single act of the British
administration ever had.
Linlithgow wrote to Churchill, admitting that he was concealing the severity and the
extent of the violence from the world. But the Americans found out, and sent their own
mediators to Delhi. The Americans’ ‘zeal in teaching us our business is in inverse ratio to

their understanding of even the most elementary of problems’, Linlithgow complained
to the Secretary of State for India, Leopold Amery. It would be bad if the Americans
came, he averred; it would be worse still if they tried to talk to Gandhi or Nehru. He
pleaded with Amery ‘to arrest at least for a time this ow of well meaning
sentimentalists’.7 But the ow of Americans continued, and Indians delighted to see
them spoiling o cial occasions for the British by wearing the wrong clothes,
disregarding procedure and cheerfully ignoring distinctions of rank.8
But the imprisoned leaders of Congress were impotent. After ve months in prison,
Gandhi’s frustration grew to the point where he threatened to fast.9 The British had been
expecting this very move. ‘He is old, and you know you can’t feed the old man,’
Linlithgow had told Louis Fischer. ‘He is like a dog and can empty his stomach at
will … I cannot permit the old man to interfere with the war effort.’10
Gandhi scheduled his fast to begin on 9 February, and continue for twenty-one days.
‘This fast can be ended sooner by government giving the needed relief’, he wrote to
Linlithgow.11 The Viceroy replied that he held Congress leaders responsible for the
terrorism that had followed Quit India, and that he could not give into terrorism. On the
point of the fast, he was softer. ‘I would welcome a decision on your part to think better
of it,’ he wrote, ‘not only because of my own natural reluctance to see you wilfully risk
your life, but because I regard the use of a fast for political purposes as a form of
political blackmail (himsa) for which there can be no moral justi cation, and understood
from your own previous writings that this was also your view.’12
This argument provoked an angry letter from the Mahatma, by return of post.
‘Posterity will judge between you as the representative of an all-powerful government
and me as a humble man who has tried to service his country and humanity through it’,
he wrote.13 But the government’s opinions on how to deal with Gandhi and his fasts had
hardened. ‘My own views have always been clear’, wrote Linlithgow. ‘They are that
Gandhi should be allowed to fast to death.’14 No negotiation would be entered into:
‘Important thing is to avoid parleying with him or giving him an excuse for that hairsplitting correspondence at which he is so expert.’15
Gandhi’s fast began at the Aga Khan’s palace in Poona, in which he was imprisoned,
with the world’s media clustered expectantly around. Three days later, the Hindus in the
Viceroy’s council had still not resigned in sympathy with the Mahatma, for fear that
Jinnah would make the most of it if they did. ‘Fast is falling rather at,’ reported
Linlithgow with satisfaction.16 Churchill, meanwhile, found the whole business
irritating. ‘I have heard that Gandhi usually has glucose in his water when doing his
various fasting antics’, he wrote to Linlithgow. ‘Would it be possible to verify this?’17
‘This may be the case,’ replied Linlithgow, ‘but those who have been in attendance on
him doubt it, and present surgeon general Bombay (a European) says that on a previous
fast G was particularly careful to guard against possibility of glucose being used.’18
From that day on, Gandhi began a marked deterioration. As he weakened, the
Americans became increasingly upset at the distress of Gandhi’s followers and the
stubborn in exibility of the British. Roosevelt – ‘probably under the in uence of
Madame Chiang-Kai-Shek and Mrs. Roosevelt’, the British thought19 – asked his envoy to

persuade the Viceroy to release Gandhi. Linlithgow refused to see the envoy, and told
him that intervention by the United States government would be ‘disastrous’.20
On the night of 21 February, Gandhi su ered a seizure. General Smuts, who had dealt
extensively with Gandhi in South Africa many years before, sent Churchill a personal
message. ‘Gandhi’s death should be avoided by all means if possible,’ he advised, ‘and it
is worth considering whether forcible feeding by injections or otherwise should not be
applied to him, as in previous cases in English practice.’21 ‘I do not think Gandhi has the
slightest intention of dying,’ replied Churchill, ‘and I imagine he has been eating better
meals than I have for the past week.’22 This was something of an overstatement – even
outside his fasts, Gandhi was not known to open a bottle of hock at breakfast. But the
apt timing of Gandhi’s heart failure to coincide with a conference of Congress leaders in
Delhi, and his recovery immediately afterwards, appeared to con rm British suspicions.
‘It now seems almost certain that the old rascal will emerge all the better from his socalled fast’, Churchill wrote to Linlithgow, advising that ‘the weapon of ridicule, so far
as is compatible with the dignity of the Government of India, should certainly be
employed.’23 To this, the Viceroy replied at length. ‘I have long know Gandhi as the
worlds [sic] most successful humbug’, he wrote. ‘I am suggesting slyly to certain
American correspondents here that it has not been so much a matter of having their
heartstrings plucked as of their legs being pulled.’24 Churchill was satis ed. ‘What fools
we should have been to flinch before all this bluff and sob-stuff.’25
A further tragedy awaited Gandhi that year. In December 1943, while he was still in
prison, his wife Kasturba fell ill with bronchitis. The disease was soon compounded by
pneumonia. Her doctors advised that Gandhi stay away from Kasturba, or at least keep
his face a distance from hers. ‘But no one dared say even that to him,’ remembered his
devotee Sushila Nayyar, herself a quali ed doctor. ‘Gandhiji did not believe in germ
theory. So the best course I felt was to say nothing.’26
As Kasturba neared death, Mohandas took over her care. Two days before she died,
she pleaded for castor oil; he would not give it. ‘A patient should never try to be his or
her own doctor,’ he told her. ‘I would like you to give up using medicine now.’27 The last
battles of the Gandhi family took place over Kasturba’s deathbed. Devadas had
penicillin own in from Calcutta to treat his mother. Gandhi was opposed from the
outset and, when he heard that the penicillin was to be given by injection, forbade it.
Devadas and his father had a ght, with Gandhi pleading, ‘Why do you not trust God?’28
Kasturba had no penicillin. Instead, her husband lled the room with his followers, who
sang devotional songs.
On 21 February, the black sheep of the family, Harilal, turned up. He had been
invited to the prison by the government, not by his family – though Mohandas had
recently caught Kasturba praying to an icon of Krishna for her eldest son to visit. When
Harilal arrived he was drunk. Gandhi’s entourage ushered him out of his mother’s
presence, while she sobbed and beat her forehead with her hands.29
The next day, Kasturba died, after a long, slow and painful illness, her su ering
unrelieved except by prayer. That night, Sushila Nayyar visited Gandhi as he lay in his
bed. ‘How God has tested my faith!’ he exclaimed. ‘If I had allowed you to give her

penicillin, it could not have saved her. But it would have meant bankruptcy of faith on
my part … And she passed away in my lap! Could it be better? I am happy beyond
measure.’30 Only Mohandas’s closest disciples were permitted to glimpse his real
feelings. After the cremation his sons gathered their mother’s ashes to throw into holy
rivers. Gandhi’s disciple Miraben, formerly Madeleine Slade, the daughter of a British
admiral, walked back to the prison with the Mahatma. On that walk, she saw him cry
for the first time.31
Back in England, Dickie Mountbatten, amazingly, had kept his job. Churchill was not
especially perturbed by the horror of Dieppe. He had proved his point, which was that
to invade across the Channel at this point was impossible. Instead of being sacked,
Mountbatten was given a new set of toys to play with. ‘Winston adored funny
operations,’ remembered an intelligence liaison o cer. 32 Mountbatten planned a raid
on the Channel Islands, leading General Brooke to complain that he ‘was again putting
up wild proposals disconnected with his direct duties.’33 He planned to sneak troops into
the north of Norway, whence they would descend on Axis forces like valkyries in little
armoured snow-carts. He puzzled over the anchorage of the Mulberry harbour,
demonstrating models to Churchill in his bathtub aboard the Queen Mary.34 At one stage,
he championed an enormous, rolled-up spiral of roadway, called the Swiss Roll, which
would be released by rocket propulsion. Unfortunately, when he invited a group of
admirals and generals to watch him demonstrate it, the Swiss Roll went o -course and
rolled most of them into the sea.35
Geo rey Pyke, one of a group of scientists Mountbatten nurtured at Combined
Operations, was his co-conspirator in the greatest of all his ights of fancy. Habakkuk
was to be an aircraft carrier, fashioned out of a colossal, moulded iceberg. It could be
frozen in Canada or Russia, and then dragged to the North Sea to ght Hitler. Pyke
invented a special extra-strong ice, which he named Pykecrete, made from paper pulp
and seawater. A prototype Habakkuk, sixty feet long, thirty feet wide and twenty feet
deep – about the size of twelve double-decker buses – was set up on Canada’s Patricia
Lake, so that Mountbatten could sell the idea to the Joint Chiefs of Sta in Quebec. With
typical theatrics, Dickie produced two blocks of ice – one standard, one Pykecrete –
pulled out a revolver, and shot each one. The standard ice exploded; the Pykecrete
survived, and so impressively that the bullet glanced o it and stung the American Chief
of Naval Operations in the leg before lodging in the wall. The Americans vetoed the
project.
In August 1943, Mountbatten had confessed to Churchill: ‘I have a congenital
weakness for feeling certain I can do anything.’36 Churchill seemed to believe he could
do anything, too, for he proposed Mountbatten for the new role of Supreme Allied
Commander, South East Asia. Roosevelt agreed: he had met Dickie during the latter’s
propaganda tour of the United States in the autumn of 1941, and liked him.37 In the
military, it appeared that Churchill and Roosevelt were more or less the only two men
who did. ‘Dickie Mountbatten is, of course, quite un t to be a Supreme Commander,’

said Montgomery. ‘He is a delightful person, has a quick and alert brain and has many
good ideas. But his knowledge of how to make war is really NIL.’38 ‘Seldom has a
Supreme Commander been more de cient of the main attributes of a Supreme
Commander than Dickie Mountbatten,’ agreed Brooke.39 But it was Admiral
Cunningham, the new First Sea Lord, who summed up the reaction most succinctly. ‘I
think most people in the Service have just laughed.’40
Mountbatten left for Delhi, brimming with delight at his appointment. ‘It is the rst
time in history that a Naval o cer has been given supreme command over land and air
forces,’ he wrote to Edwina. ‘It will mean another stripe.’41 But the person to whom
Dickie most wanted to show his stripe was nowhere in evidence. His wife was now
Superintendent-in-Chief of the St John Ambulance Nursing Division, and had no interest
in going out to Asia to act as the Supremo’s hostess. ‘I really don’t know how I will be
able to do this job without you’, wrote Dickie plaintively to her. ‘Wouldn’t it be romantic
to live together in the place we got engaged in, and in a job which is really more
important in the war than our host’s was …’42 But Edwina stayed put in London.
Mountbatten’s role at South East Asia Command (SEAC) was ill-de ned, and he was
regarded with suspicion by much of the existing hierarchy. His own superiors had
con icting interests: the British Chiefs of Sta intended for SEAC to recapture Burma,
Malaya, Singapore and the rest of the former European colonies; the Americans only
really cared about helping China and were wary of imperialist tendencies among their
European allies.43 In the absence of strong direction, Mountbatten decided that morale
needed the boosting power of a new logo. He dedicated many hours to sketching a
Japanese rising sun impaled on a sword before someone informed him that the branding
of Allied uniforms with such an emblem would, in the event of capture by the Japanese,
guarantee the immediate execution of the soldiers in them. His nal design of a phoenix
was less controversial, though no more lauded: the troops nicknamed it the ‘pig’s arse’.
Still, that probably cheered them up, which was the point. To boost morale further,
Mountbatten attempted to persuade his cousin, King George VI, to visit. The King was
receptive to the idea, but Churchill blocked the trip. Anglo-American relations were now
very prickly over India, and a triumphant tour by the King-Emperor would have been
provocative.44 Mountbatten, meanwhile, was reduced to visiting hospitals, and making
careful notes on any lack of sta or equipment. ‘I really can’t bear to see someone’s
stomach being cut open and all their guts pulled out,’ he noted, ‘but it is di cult to
refuse what is evidently regarded as a great privilege.’45 It escaped no one’s attention
whose example had inspired this initiative, though there was a general consensus that
she was better at it, and some even thought she might have been better at the rest of the
Supreme Allied Commander’s job, too. ‘There wouldn’t have been 7,000 of us in
Command HQ if Edwina had been “Supremo”,’ said one of Dickie’s sta at the time.
‘There would have been 700, and we’d have been in Singapore six months before
Hiroshima instead of after.’46
By the middle of 1944 Mountbatten had moved his headquarters from Delhi to the
beautiful Botanic Gardens at Kandy in Ceylon, which was 2000 miles from the front
line.47 This distance was probably no bad thing. Mountbatten was, it must be admitted,

a hopeless strategist. It was left to commanders of proven competence – notably
William Slim and the 14th Army – to win the battles. Mountbatten spent a lot of time
sitting in Kandy devising complex and manpower-heavy operations against the
Japanese, which were cancelled by the Chiefs of Sta whenever he nished putting
them together.48
Meanwhile, outside India, something alarming was happening. Subhas Chandra Bose
had fallen in with the Nazis. The political vacuum created by Quit India had not only
bene ted the Muslim League; it had allowed the Indian National Army (INA), Bose’s
militia, to get a foothold. In Germany, Bose met Hitler, Mussolini and high o cials from
the Japanese governments, and, to the disgust of Nazi eugenicists, involved himself with
a German woman.49 He was indulged with the creation of an Indian Legion in the
German Army, though the reputation it soon carved out for itself as brutal and illdisciplined did him no credit.50
In the summer of 1943, Bose emerged from the foam o the coast of Singapore, a
fascist Aphrodite spewed up from the deep, with a Japanese submarine serving as his
scallop shell. The Germans had put him in a U-boat at Hamburg three months
previously, and he had swapped ships o the coast of Madagascar. He was taken to
Tokyo, and given command of the formerly British Indian soldiers that had been
captured in Singapore. More than half of them had refused to ght for the Japanese,
and were put in camps where thousands perished. But Bose managed to persuade 10,000
more among the survivors to join the turncoats, and was able to add 20,000 recruits
from Malaya.51 In October 1943 he declared a provisional government of Free India,
and made himself Head of State, Prime Minister, Minister of War, and Minister of
Foreign A airs. He set up his government’s headquarters in the Andaman Islands, a
tropical archipelago in the Bay of Bengal, and declared war on the United States and
Britain. In January 1944 he moved his base to Rangoon in Japanese-occupied Burma,
and marched on India with 7000 of his men.
While Bose geared up for an attack on Assam, the Allied commanders did their best to
keep Mountbatten out of their way. ‘Dickie has been interfering in your battle again,’
General Browning told General Christison, who had been commanding the defence at
Arakan. ‘I’ve told him he must not and he is going to come and apologize to you. Don’t
be nice to him, he’s so keen he’ll only do it again!’52 In the hope of finding someone who
would be nice to him, Mountbatten went to visit his deputy, the American General
Joseph Stilwell, on the Chinese front. Stilwell, known as ‘Vinegar Joe’ for his acid
tongue, was not a fan of the British – ‘the bastardly hypocrites do their best to cut our
throats on all occasions. The pig fuckers’ – but had been unusually a able towards
Mountbatten. Close contact soon caused him to revert to his natural state. ‘The Glamour
Boy is just that,’ he decided. ‘Enormous sta , endless walla-walla, but damned little
fighting.’53
Returning from his visit to Stilwell’s front on 7 March 1944, Mountbatten nally
received his war injury. He drove his jeep over a bamboo stump and it icked up into
his face, hitting him in the left eye. Even the threat of blindness could not diminish his
enthusiasm for action. Five days later, he was ignoring doctors, tearing o bandages

and heading back to bother the real commanders.54 The battle of Imphal was beginning,
with the large British garrison besieged by a smaller but e ective force of Japanese. The
Japanese were reinforced by the INA, which reached Imphal by May. The British
garrison held them o until the monsoon rains came, literally dampening the e orts of
Bose’s men. The siege collapsed into retreat by 22 June, and the ragged remains of the
INA, depleted by desertion and suicide, surrendered in Rangoon in May 1945.
Bose himself escaped from Saigon on the last Japanese plane out of that city, but
would not live out the year. In August 1945 he died when his plane crashed in Formosa.
Conspiracy theories abounded that Bose had survived, and was raising a new army in
China, Tibet or the USSR; these were believed in high enough circles that even Gandhi
professed them for a while, though he later recanted.55 The story of Bose’s survival
continues to have its adherents. In 1978, the elderly Lord Mountbatten would receive a
letter of the most baroque character from the Indian High Commissioner to London. He
accused Mountbatten of helping Nehru to cover up Bose’s escape to the Soviet Union,
‘perhaps because the British did not want to pick up a quarrel with their erstwhile ally
and Nehru did not want to have a rival.’56
Whatever happened to Bose, the INA was nished as a political or military force.
Despite his disgust at Bose’s totalitarian leanings, Nehru was moved by the passion of
his soldiers. The trial of INA o cers at the Red Fort in December 1945 would persuade
him to swallow his long-held principle that, because he did not recognize the British
regime, he could not participate in its legal system. He donned the wig and gown of a
British barrister for the last time in his life to defend them.
Mountbatten’s greatest asset, besides his own charm, was his wife. Back in Europe,
Edwina had been asked by General Eisenhower to work for the Red Cross in eld
hospitals. Edwina’s hospital visiting technique, later to garner so much approval in
India, was developed in Europe during 1944. She always carried make-up, a comb, a
clothes brush and a shoe-shine pad so she looked her best, always inspected hygiene and
organizational facilities with a keen eye for nursing procedure, and always spoke to
every single patient in the hospital.
Later that year, her husband invited her to lead the recovery e ort in South East Asia.
On 9 January 1945, she arrived in Karachi and immediately embarked on a tour of the
local hospitals. She met up with her husband shortly afterwards in Delhi. Woman
magazine wrote a gushing pro le of her a few years later, in which it was claimed that
she said in Delhi: ‘Keep one of my afternoons free. Dickie and I want to go and hold
hands in the bungalow where he proposed to me.’57 The source for the comment was a
friend of hers, who wrote to Edwina to apologize. She was unbothered: ‘the sentence in
question sounded deliciously romantic to the readers of “Woman”, and I believe they lap
it up!!’58 Delicious though it may have been, the story was not completely unfeasible.
On this occasion, Dickie and Edwina enjoyed an a ectionate reunion, which Dickie was
confident enough to describe as ‘our new-found relationship’.59
When Dickie had left for SEAC, Edwina’s a air with Bunny Phillips had been so

serious that he had toyed with the idea of divorce – not on grounds of personal a ront,
but because he did not want to stand in their way. Instead he found Bunny a job in
SEAC, and the marriage held. The arrangement was unusual but, according to the
Mountbattens’ daughter Pamela, it worked: ‘Because my mother was happy with Bunny,
it made her much easier in the home as well.’60 Their a air had lasted nearly a decade
when, in the summer of 1944, Bunny uneasily announced that he was going to marry
another woman. Edwina was devastated. Dickie wrote his wife an extraordinarily
charitable letter of sympathy.
I must tell you again how deeply and sincerely I feel for you at this moment when, however unsel sh you may be
about A. [Bunny]’s engagement, the fact that it is bound to alter the relationship – though I feel convinced not the
friendship – which has existed between you, is bound to upset you emotionally and make you feel unhappy.
You have however still got the love and genuine a ection of two chaps – A. and me – and the support of all your
many friends …
A. always knew that I had accepted the fact that after the war you were at liberty to get married and I could not let
either of you get the impression that anything I had ever done had stood in the way.61
Edwina was moved. ‘As well as helping so tremendously at what must be a di cult time
in my life,’ she wrote, ‘it has made me realise more than ever before how deeply
devoted I am to you and what very real and true a ection as well as immense
admiration I have for you.’62 When she came out to the east, she sparkled with new
enthusiasm – and transferred much of it to her adoring husband before she left again in
April. Getting Edwina’s attention was never easy, but, whenever Dickie managed it, he
glowed in the light of her approval. The two would sit at breakfast and compare their
total numbers of British hands shaken, or hospital patients comforted.63
Mountbatten was in London when news of the Japanese surrender came through. He
returned to Singapore for the surrender ceremony with the left-wing journalist and MP
Tom Driberg. On their way, they visited Burma, where Driberg was able to witness both
Mountbattens in action. In Rangoon, they attended a dinner party with the resistance
leader, Aung San – to whom Mountbatten was supposed to present a ceremonial dagger
as a token of the Allies’ gratitude. Mountbatten had already noted of Aung San and his
Burma National Army that ‘I am completely on their side’, a view which had taken some
of the shine o him as far as Churchill was concerned. ‘I hope Mountbatten is not going
to meddle in Burmese politics,’ he had noted severely, as the campaign for an
independent Burma gathered pace.64 The imperial loyalists who organized the evening
were obviously more Churchill than Mountbatten, and had churlishly seated Aung San at
a lower table at the far end of the room, omitting his name from the list of toasts.
Mountbatten atly refused to speak unless Aung San was invited to do so, too. The hosts
gave in, and, according to Driberg, ‘Aung San’s was the speech of the evening.’65
As the Mountbattens and Driberg drove on towards Singapore, they stopped at the
prisoner-of-war camps that still housed many British soldiers. At each camp, the
performance was the same. Dickie and Edwina would leap on to a truck, and he would
order the men to break ranks and cluster around. He would speak for approximately ten

minutes, combining general world news with an update on how long it might be until
the former POWs could be taken home. Edwina on her own was every bit as impressive,
if not more so. She had organized a council to bring together the Red Cross and other
welfare organizations, and visited even those camps in the most perilous parts of the
interior. ‘Conditions indescribable’, she wrote in her diary, but her spirits remained
high.66 One o cer remembered Edwina visiting his POW camp in a remote part of
Thailand. She sprung, unexpectedly, from a convoy of army jeeps, and was swarmed by
a crowd of curious POWs. ‘I know I am the rst white woman you have seen for years,’
she joked, ‘but remember I have got a husband knocking about here somewhere.’ She
visited the eld hospital, taking the name and address of each invalid. Many of their
mothers later received personal letters from Edwina, saying that she had seen their sons
and found them well. Before she left, Edwina passed on the news that 20,000 Japanese
soldiers at the nearby headquarters had accepted the surrender. ‘She left the camp to
roars from the men,’ remembered the officer admiringly.67
‘To me she was the famous playgirl of the twenties and thirties, and some people said
she’s only coming out here to pursue an a air,’ remembered Lieutenant Colonel Paul
Crook. But, when he watched her tour Singapore camps, making lists of needs and
sourcing them the next day from SEAC, Crook was won over. He was impressed with her
fearlessness in visiting dangerous areas, which were o limits to much of the military –
let alone to military wives. ‘The bravery of it all was quite remarkable,’ he added.68 One
American general put it more baldly: ‘She is so smart she scares me.’69
Though he was fond of Dickie, Driberg was not blind to the man’s faults. In Penang, it
was discovered that the batman had packed Mountbatten’s set of full-sized decorations
rather than the miniatures that are correctly worn with evening dress. Dickie threw a
tantrum. After several frantic telephone calls between aides-de-camp, the miniatures
were found back at South East Asia Command. Luckily, ‘There was just time before the
dinner for an RAF aircraft to fly them from Kandy to Penang.’70
On 12 September, Mountbatten accepted the Japanese surrender in Singapore.
Afterwards, Driberg and Edwina went on to Saigon. A couple of weeks before, the last
Emperor of Indochina had abdicated in favour of nationalist leader Ho Chi Minh, and
the Democratic Republic of Vietnam had been declared. Very early in the morning of 23
September, French forces, supported by British Gurkhas, stormed buildings occupied by
the Viet Minh, whom they suspected of planning an insurrection. This strike did not
begin the First Indochina War, but those on the spot could tell that a build-up was
underway. Driberg had contacts which he believed could get him in with Ho, and o ered
his services as a mediator. Mountbatten relayed this to London, and the Foreign O ce
sent back its authorization – but, before it arrived, Driberg had to leave.71 The situation
in Indochina was part of a far greater picture. From the ashes of a worldwide war, a
new world was rising.
Among the highest ranks of the British Empire, few were ready for the shift into a
post-colonial era. One man, however, was. ‘It is horrifying’, Mountbatten had written in
his diary shortly before the end of the war in the east, ‘to think that the American and
Indian press evidently still regard us as merely Imperial monsters, little better than

Fascists or Nazis.’72 When Attlee vacillated and Churchill blustered over setting a date
for Burmese self-government, it was Mountbatten who tried to persuade them to set a
rm timetable for the handover.73 It was Mountbatten, too, who had opened
negotiations with Aung San; it was Mountbatten who had wanted to negotiate with Ho
Chi Minh; it was Mountbatten who had persuaded the Dutch to negotiate with Sukarno
in Indonesia. In all of these matters, he was led by his wife. Referring to Indonesia, he
admitted: ‘Nobody gave me an idea of the strength of the nationalist movements.
Edwina was the rst person to give me an inkling of what was going on.’74 From then
on, said Driberg, ‘she showed an instant strong sympathy with any Asian nationalist
who was being oppressed by some American-backed right-wing regime.’75
It cannot be pretended that Mountbatten was a brilliant sailor, nor even that he was a
competent one. It cannot be pretended that he was a brilliant commander-in-chief. And
it is certainly true that he could be hasty, negligent, and easily distracted by trivialities.
Nonetheless, he was the man of the coming age. Perhaps uniquely among the high ranks
of the British armed forces, he was liberal, personally charming, and apparently
favoured Asian nationalism over Western imperialism. He may have been a bit of a joke
in Whitehall. But, only fteen months after the end of the war, Dickie Mountbatten
would be called upon to act as the saviour of his country.

CHAPTER 9: NOW OR NEVER

election. The race pitted Churchill, victorious
WITH THE WAR WON, WINSTON CHURCHILL CALLED A GENERAL
and iconic, against the at and e cient Clement Attlee. Despite his friendship with
Churchill, Dickie Mountbatten shared the political colours of his wife. During the
campaign, he answered the door at Broadlands to a Tory canvasser. ‘I don’t have a vote
because I’m a peer,’ he told her. ‘If I did, I’d vote Labour. You can try going round the
back. I think my butler’s a Conservative.’1
To the surprise of almost everyone, and most of all Churchill, there was a Labour
landslide, and Attlee became Prime Minister. In his speech opening the new parliament,
Attlee had the King announce that his government planned ‘the early realization of full
self-government in India’.2 The contention that India should be given back to the
Indians did not sit well with Churchill and the opposition, but they had little room for
manoeuvre. The war had ended, and Britain was broke. The gap in the balance of
payments at the end of the war had widened to £2.1 billion (then $8 billion), roughly
the cost of administering the Empire for two years. Keynes had told Attlee frankly that
he was facing a ‘ nancial Dunkirk’, and the only option was to seek aid of around $5
billion from the United States.3 The funds available to repair wartime devastation would
hardly bene t Britain: they were diverted to the nations which had hosted land battles,
such as France, Holland and Belgium.4 The Treasury was all but empty, and the debts of
Empire lay in the middle of it like an open drain. An economic aspiration had started
the British Empire. An economic reality would end it.
There was a practical urgency to the desire to dump the Empire, which had shown up
most clearly during the Bengal Famine of 1943. During the war, the British had shipped
grain and railway stocks out of India, weakening its domestic food supply network. At
the beginning of 1943, Churchill ordered a cut of 60 per cent in sailings to the
subcontinent, saying that the Indian people and the Allied forces there ‘must live on
their stocks’.5 But Bengal had been lashed by a massive cyclone in October 1942, and in
the wake of that by three tidal waves.6 The rice harvest had been relatively poor during
1942 and 1943, prompting panic-buying in the market, stockpiling by producers, and a
massive increase in the price of foodgrains that coincided unhappily with a fall in realterm agricultural wages.7
Around six million people were a ected by the subsequent famine, and between one
and two million of them died.8 Hospitals lled up with wretched and emaciated
peasants, su ering from dysentery, anaemia, cholera and smallpox; patients came in
sweating from malarial fevers, and breaking out in the hard papules of scabies.9 Almost
all of the dead were poor people in rural areas, excepting those few in the cities who
contracted disease from the wandering su erers. In the cool bungalows and elegant

mansions of Calcutta, rich Europeans and Indians alike supped on plenty. Supplies were
available, just at a price that the poor could not a ord. Shameful fortunes were reaped
from misery and hunger.10
The famine was the direct result of the failure of the Bengal government and, indeed,
the government of India as a whole, to regulate the market – thus allowing the price of
rice to rise out of the reach of rural agricultural workers. When the governments
realized their mistake, they compounded it by handing the market over to ‘unrestricted
free trade’ in March 1943.11 The blame for the famine cannot entirely be laid upon the
British, for the government of Bengal was run by elected Indians;12 but the gross
inhumanity shown by that government was matched in London. During the crisis, the
army veteran Lord Wavell took over as Viceroy. He repeatedly telegrammed Churchill,
telling him that millions of people were dying in India and that extra food was needed.
In reply, ‘Winston sent me a peevish telegram to ask why Gandhi hadn’t died yet!’13
Churchill refused to release the government’s readily available food stocks, on the
grounds that British people might need them at some point. Despite enormous pressure
from Wavell in Delhi and the India Secretary, Leo Amery, in London, Churchill and the
Bengal government persisted in a policy whose e ect was a sort of genocide by
capitalism. The government of India, in a panic, lied and pretended that the food stocks
were on the way.14 The damning o cial report concluded that the famine had been
avoidable, and its management had been a catastrophe.
By 1946, the subcontinent was a mess, with British civil and military o cers
increasingly desperate to leave, and a growing hostility to their presence among
Indians. In January British RAF servicemen mutinied in India and the Middle East,
demanding to be sent home. Soon after, there were a couple of small anti-British
rebellions in the Royal Indian Navy, but these were swiftly crushed and the o cers
court-martialled. Gra ti began to appear on Navy property in Bombay: ‘Quit India’,
‘Revolt Now’, ‘Kill the British White Bastards’. In February, the crews of HMIS Talwar,
Sutlej and Jumna refused to work or eat. HMIS Narbada turned its guns on the Bombay
Yacht Club. The Congress ag was raised, and a riot broke out in the town. In Karachi,
the crew of HMIS Hindustan shouted ‘Jai Hind’ – the old INA slogan, ‘Victory to India’ –
and opened re on the town, but were quickly arrested. The next day, the Army red on
the mutineers at Bombay and crushed them swiftly too.15
The reaction to these mutinies had shown that the British could still put down dissent
if they wished. That would not be the case for much longer. The granting of leave to
civil and military o cers after the war would mean that many parts of India had to be
run by a skeleton sta . More importantly still, as one civil servant pointed out, to
reassert British power physically after the war would have been politically impossible:
‘neither British opinion nor world opinion would have tolerated it.’16
Now that they were gearing up to leave, though, the British authorities decided to turn
some of the politicians they had previously imprisoned to good use, and it was in this
spirit that Wavell suggested Nehru go to Malaya at the beginning of 1946. Malaya had
seen strikes and unrest among its Indian population, on account of the treatment
accorded to the INA prisoners. Nehru had been released from prison only nine months

before. Now he was to be the emissary of cohesion and calm, but apparently not
everyone had been informed. The Malayan administration planned to line the streets
with armed soldiers. The Supreme Allied Commander of South East Asia, Dickie
Mountbatten, put a stop to that. He insisted that Nehru be received as a distinguished
statesman, and that, rather than policing the streets to warn people o , lorries be sent
to bring Indians in from the suburbs especially to see him.17
The visit was an extraordinary and unexpected success. Nehru arrived at Government
House in Singapore on 18 March 1946, accompanied by his sister Betty’s husband, Raja
Hutheesing, and it was there that he met Mountbatten for the rst time. He was given
tea, and driven by Dickie to meet Edwina and other welfare workers at the YMCA Rest
Room for Indian Servicemen on Waterloo Street.18 There he was greeted by the public
with the sort of reception more usually reserved for the likes of Bing Crosby or Rita
Hayworth. The YMCA building was surrounded by cheering and shouting Indians, in
crowds so dense that Mountbatten and Nehru had trouble getting in. As the two men
disappeared inside, dozens of Nehru’s fans surged forward and began to clamber
through the windows after them.19
In the St John Ambulance canteen, which Edwina had set up in a Nissen hut, the
crowd surged forward and knocked Raja Hutheesing over. Edwina was knocked down
too, and fell at on the oor under the stampeding crowd. ‘Your wife; your wife; we
must go to her,’ shouted Nehru to Mountbatten. The two men linked arms and barged
forward to nd her, but she had already scrambled out of the crush. Nehru and
Mountbatten helped her up and carried her to safety.20 As rst meetings go, theirs could
hardly have established a greater informality.
Afterwards, Edwina was the rst to emerge from the YMCA, which she did to a roar of
approval from the crowd. The roar intensi ed as Dickie appeared, and the two of them,
laughing, pushed through to their car. They turned to watch with amusement how
Jawahar would fare. There was a pause before he appeared; when he did, the crowd
reached an almost frightening peak of frenzied adulation. The fans still in the building
rushed forward and Jawahar, along with a small clutch of o cials, was shoved roughly
down the steps.
That night, Nehru and Hutheesing dined informally at Government House with the
Mountbattens. At Mountbatten’s request, Nehru agreed to forgo the planned jamboree
around the laying of a wreath on the INA memorial the next day.21 His conciliatory
attitude was demonstrated again later that morning, when he held a meeting in the
Jalan Besar stadium. A ag was hoisted to the singing of anthems and the shouting of
slogans. Soon this deteriorated into the INA’s trademark cry: ‘Blood! Blood! Blood!’ But,
instead of feeding the crowd’s frenzy, Nehru took the microphone to rebuke them. He
told them that the time for violence had passed, and that the peaceful, constitutional
route was now the clearest path to Indian freedom. (Never a complete Gandhian, he
added that he would not hesitate to call on them should the need for violence arise.) As
the Director of Intelligence for SEAC commented, ‘His tone throughout was conciliatory
and calming, and undoubtedly caused a measure of disappointment.’22
Nehru’s trip, and Mountbatten’s reception, had set a new tone of civility in Anglo-

Indian relations. Alan Campbell-Johnson, Mountbatten’s omnipresent press attaché,
remembered that ‘the two men made a deep personal impression on each other.’23 Nehru
had felt warm enough to send Mountbatten a copy of his new book, The Discovery of
India, inscribed ‘in memory of a pleasant evening and with all good wishes’.24 On 25
March he went on to Penang, but media attention had moved back to Delhi – where the
Cabinet Mission was arriving to negotiate the end of the British Empire.
The arrival of the Cabinet Mission was greeted by Time magazine with a front cover
showing a scowling Jinnah with the caption, ‘His Muslim tiger wants to eat the Hindu
cow’. Time‘s pro-Congress line re ected a widespread opinion in the United States that
India should remain as one nation. As Roosevelt had told the British chargé d’a airs in
New York a few years before, any partition of India ‘sounded terrible’ in the United
States, echoing as it did their own civil war.25
It is obvious from the records of the Cabinet Mission that, by this point, the British
were desperate for a settlement. The Mission’s plan proposed a federal India, with a
ten-year constitutional review which would have allowed Muslim provinces to leave the
Indian Union if they wished. To the astonishment of everyone, including his own
supporters, Jinnah accepted the plan – e ectively giving up his campaign for an
immediate Pakistan. It has been suggested that he was blu ng, because he knew Nehru
would reject the plan. If so, it would have been an extraordinary risk to take.26 It is
more plausible that Jinnah actually meant to accept it. His intention, since the very
beginning of his career, had been to prevent minority Muslim interests from being
submerged under a Hindu-majority government. The Cabinet Mission’s plan did indeed
provide for that, and paved the way for Pakistan in a decade. It may simply have been
good enough.27
Almost everyone on the Mission regarded Gandhi as the biggest culprit in holding up
negotiations. Sir Francis Fearon Turnbull, a civil servant, was impressed with Gandhi’s
clever drafting and legal mind, but not in the least with his attitude. ‘The nasty old man
has grasped that he can get what he asks for’, he wrote, ‘& so goes on asking for more &
more.’28 Wavell, the Viceroy, agreed. ‘Gandhi was the wrecker’, he wrote to the King.29
Even Lord Pethick-Lawrence, the new Secretary of State for India noted for his mild
manners and cruelly nicknamed ‘Pathetic-Lawrence’ on account of them, became
exasperated by the Mahatma. He ‘let y in a way I have never heard him before’, wrote
Turnbull. ‘Said he was coming to believe Gandhi did not care whether 2 or 3 million
people died & would rather that they should than that he should compromise.’30
In the middle of June, Wavell got fed up with negotiating. ‘O! dear, my poor Archie
does wish himself back among soldiers’, wrote his wife, Queenie, to her friend Edwina
Mountbatten. ‘It is very di cult and trying when all your life you have dealt with men
who mean what they say and know what they want, to talk and talk and talk with those
who almost invariably say what they don’t mean.’31 Wavell announced his intention to
form an interim government of six Congress Hindus (including one Untouchable), ve
Muslim Leaguers, a Sikh, a Parsi and an Indian Christian. Jinnah had already accepted
the plan, and it was rumoured that Nehru and Vallabhbhai Patel were ready to
acquiesce. But Gandhi lent heavily on Congress to reject it, on the grounds that there

was no Congress Muslim in the government. Gandhi meant well: he hoped to
demonstrate to Muslims that Congress was their party too. In retrospect, though, most
commentators have agreed that his derailment of the plan was a point of no return. The
Muslim League’s mistrust of Gandhi reached a fever pitch: from then on, the partition of
India was inevitable.32 It fell to Nehru, on 10 August, to inform Wavell that he was
prepared to form a government.
As soon as Nehru accepted the premiership, Jinnah dropped his support for the plan.
The council of the Muslim League declared a Direct Action Day for 16 August. ‘We will
have,’ Jinnah announced, ‘either a divided India or a destroyed India.’33 It looked like
he might get both. On the morning of 16 August, Calcutta erupted into a frenzy of
violence. Groups of Muslims, Hindus and the small community of Sikhs attacked each
other in the streets. Others formed murder squads to venture into di erent quarters of
the town, killing, beating and raping anyone they could nd. Their sadism knew no
bounds. Nirad Chaudhuri, a Calcutta resident, described a man tied to the connector box
of the tramlines with a small hole drilled in his skull so he might bleed to death as
slowly as possible. He also heard of a boy of about fourteen years old, who was stripped
of his Hindu clothing so that the mob might ascertain that he was circumcised – proving
he was a Muslim. The boy was ung into a pond and held under with bamboo poles,
‘with a Bengali engineer educated in England noting the time he took to die on his Rolex
wristwatch, and wondering how tough the life of a Muslim bastard was.’34
For the next week, gangs terrorized the city. The riots spread through Bengal and
Assam, and triggered copycat killings in the Punjab and the North-West Frontier
Province. By the time the bloodshed nally subsided, deaths and serious injuries in
Calcutta alone were estimated at 15,000 or 20,000, and the streets were piled with
corpses to the height of two storeys in some areas.35 The bloated carcasses of holy Hindu
cows lay stinking and y-covered beside the bodies of their owners. The American
photojournalist Margaret Bourke-White arrived to see ‘a scene that looked like
Buchenwald’; no light comparison, for she had herself seen that, too.36 Nehru went to
Calcutta with his younger sister, Betty, to spearhead the government’s e ort to open
rst-aid camps and canteens. ‘Many of these people who came to us seemed utterly
bewildered,’ Betty remembered; ‘even those who had taken part in the killings seemed
not to know why. Often they said to Bhai [Brother], “We don’t know. It’s you politicians
who have done this, because we have lived in peace for years”.’37 Those politicians were
still not prepared to compromise. When Nehru o cially became Vice President of the
Viceroy’s interim government on 2 September 1946, Jinnah instructed all Muslims to
display black flags and declared a day of mourning.38
Catapulted into a position of responsibility over a dramatically deteriorating nation,
Nehru needed more than ever the steadying hand of his guru. But the Mahatma Gandhi
was in no mood to lead Congress. ‘I have no power,’ he told journalist Louis Fischer. ‘I
have not changed Congress. I have a catalogue of grievances against it.’ Nor had he
much more patience for compromise with the Muslims. Fischer interviewed Gandhi in
the summer of 1946, and found him at his most intemperate. ‘Jinnah is an evil genius,’
Gandhi told him. ‘He believes he is a prophet.’ He alleged that Jinnah had ‘cast a spell

over the Moslem, who is a simple-minded man’. He concluded that he thought the
Muslim League would ultimately join the interim government. ‘But the Sikhs have
refused. They are stiff-necked like the Jews.’39
Many of Gandhi’s acolytes were untroubled by these incendiary comments. But serious
dissent was caused among even the most loyal of them by his ‘brahmacharya
experiments’ during 1946 and 1947. The aged Mahatma had been ‘testing’ his vow of
celibacy by sleeping at night in bed with a naked or partially clothed woman. The object
of the experiments was to transcend physical arousal. One night, when the police turned
up to arrest him, they found him in bed with a girl of eighteen. The British authorities
decided that discretion was the better part of valour, and hushed up the police report.40
Nirmal Kumar Bose, a distinguished anthropologist who had volunteered his services
to Gandhi as a secretary, wrote a detailed memoir of the experiments. According to him,
several women were involved, and many among them became personally possessive of
Gandhi, some to the point of emotional crisis. Gandhi’s grandniece, Abha, who started
sleeping next to the Mahatma when she was just sixteen and he seventy-four, spoke of
the experience in later life. ‘I don’t remember whether he had any clothes on or not,’ she
told an interviewer. ‘I don’t like to think about it.’ Sushila Nayyar said that Gandhi had
told another of his young relatives, Manu, that they both needed to be naked to offer the
purest of sacri ces, because ‘We both may be killed by the Muslims at any time.’41 There
was a disquieting incident with Nayyar herself, when cries and two loud slaps on esh
were heard from Gandhi’s hut. The ashramites who ran to their aid found Gandhi and
Nayyar both in tears, though neither would explain why. Bose later asked Gandhi
whether he had struck Nayyar. Gandhi denied it, and insisted that his behaviour was
above board.42 But even if the Mahatma’s intentions were pure, the objectors argued, it
was disrespectful to treat women as instruments. He responded with more denials. Bose
remembered that, ‘If anybody questioned Gandhiji’s purity in respect of sex, he could y
into an anger.’43 Along with several others, Bose felt he had no option but to resign
from Gandhi’s service. The Mahatma was unmoved. ‘If I can master this,’ he is supposed
to have said of his experiments, ‘I can still beat Jinnah.’44 But at seventy-seven, Gandhi
had been sapped of political power. His importance to the independence process was by
then talismanic.
Whitehall was awash with intrigue. In the House of Commons, Churchill had replied to
the Cabinet Mission plan by arguing that, ‘We cannot enforce by British arms a Britishmade Constitution upon India against the wishes of any of the main elements in Indian
life.’45 By the main elements, he meant eighty million Muslims, sixty million
Untouchables, and the princely states that comprised a third of the land and a quarter of
the population: all of which feared for their fate under a caste-Hindu majority rule.
‘To my mind, the most important point is that we should do all we can to persuade
and encourage the principal elements in India to remain attached to the British Empire,’
the lawyer Walter Monckton had written to Churchill two days after the Cabinet Mission
P l a n was announced. ‘I see little prospect of inducing Congress to take such a

line … The Muslim League, on the other hand, are naturally ready – though they will
not be anxious to express their readiness publicly – to see the British connection
retained.’46
Churchill read Beverley Nichols’s controversial Verdict on India, a profoundly
conservative book which argued that the British could not quit without creating a
separate homeland for the Muslims. Afterwards, he declared to his wife that he was
depressed by the scorn with which the raj was viewed in India and America; that ‘out of
my shadows has come a renewed resolve to go ghting on as long as possible and to
make sure the Flag is not let down while I am at the wheel’, he wrote. ‘I agree with the
book and also with its conclusion – Pakistan.’47 Churchill’s vocal support of Pakistan
would be instrumental in creating the world’s rst modern Islamic state, and in
sabotaging any last hopes of Indian unity.
Exactly how far the alliance between Churchill and Jinnah went is hard to tell from
the few remaining records. It has been rumoured that they had formed a secret pact
several years before. Churchill, then Prime Minister, was said to have pledged to grant
Jinnah Pakistan in return for Muslim League support of the Allied war e ort. It is true
that Jinnah repeatedly o ered deals of this kind to the Viceroy, but there is scant
evidence that he corresponded directly with Churchill on the matter.48 Of course, any
such letters would have been very unlikely to survive: for not only would they show
Jinnah conspiring to keep the British in India, but they might have opened Churchill to
charges of treason.49
Extensive letters between Churchill and Jinnah from 1946 survive in both men’s
papers.50 They do not reveal a particularly close friendship, but do show Churchill’s
keen interest in the Muslim League. He wrote to Jinnah that any Muslim state ought to
remain in the Commonwealth. ‘Having got out of the British Commonwealth of Nations,’
he wrote, ‘India will be thrown into great confusion, and will have no means of defence
against in ltration or invasion from the North.’51 This statement was unquali ed.
Perhaps Churchill was pointing out the vulnerability of the north Pakistan border
against the Afghans and the Russians; perhaps he was implying that a future Pakistan –
to the north of India – might be able to invade India. Either way, the implication that
Pakistan needed British help was there.
In December the British government ew Nehru, Jinnah and Wavell to London to talk
to Pethick-Lawrence, Cripps and Attlee.52 On 5 December, the unfortunate King George
VI found himself sitting between Nehru and Jinnah at a Buckingham Palace luncheon.
The atmosphere was so poisonous that he summoned Attlee three days later to discuss it.
‘The two main political parties in India had no real will to reach agreement among
themselves’, he wrote; ‘the situation might so develop as to result in Civil War in India,
& there seemed to be little realization among Indian leaders of the risk that ordered
govt. might collapse.’ He concluded: ‘The Indian leaders have got to learn that the
responsibility is theirs & that they must learn how to govern.’53 Nehru lasted through
only three days of squabbling before ying home, seething at the intransigence he
perceived in London. On 9 December he convened a constituent assembly, in which the
Muslim League refused to participate.

In Britain, Jinnah fared better. At Buckingham Palace, he found that the King was in
favour of Pakistan; on talking to the Queen afterwards, he found her even more in
favour; and nally he spoke to Queen Mary, who was ‘100% Pakistan!’ He later told
this anecdote to the Viceroy’s principal secretary, Sir Eric Miéville. ‘I replied that I was
sorry Their Majesties had acted in such an unconstitutional way as to express their
opinions on political matters connected with their Indian Empire,’ wrote Miéville, ‘at
which he laughed quite a lot.’54 Jinnah spent a Saturday at Churchill’s country house,
Chartwell, on 7 December; the meeting was evidently a success, for he afterwards
invited Churchill to a luncheon party at Claridge’s on 12 December.55 By this point, their
relationship had warmed up. On 11 December 1946, Churchill wrote secretly to ‘My
dear Mr Jinnah’:
I should greatly like to accept your kind invitation to luncheon on December 12. I feel, however, that it would perhaps
be wiser for us not to be associated publicly at this juncture.
I greatly valued our talk the other day, and I now enclose the address to which any telegrams you may wish to send
me can be sent without attracting attention in India. I will always sign myself ‘Gilliatt’. Perhaps you will let me know
to what address I should telegraph to you and how you will sign yourself.’56
Jinnah was to write to Churchill in the guise of Miss Elizabeth Gilliatt of 6 Westminster
Gardens. (Images of Mr Toad dressed as a washerwoman must be dismissed – Miss
Gilliatt was Churchill’s secretary, not an alter ego.) After this letter, the trail goes cold.
Hardly any further correspondence between Churchill and Jinnah is to be found among
either man’s papers, beyond a few brief notes enclosing press cuttings or speeches. It
seems likely that there would have been additional letters of substance after one so
cordial as the above. If so, they were probably destroyed. Little may be told from this
fragment, though the cloak-and-dagger approach implies that the two men were up to
something interesting. Churchill’s behaviour over the next year would be extremely
favourable to Pakistan and to Jinnah personally. There can be no doubt that his public
championing of the Muslim League’s cause in the House of Commons throughout 1946
and 1947, and of Pakistan’s thereafter, was crucial both to the creation of Pakistan and
to the British government’s support for its interests over the years to come. If Jinnah is
regarded as the father of Pakistan, Churchill must qualify as its uncle; and, therefore, as
a pivotal figure in the resurgence of political Islam.
Across the Atlantic, the United States was also re ning its interest in Indian politics.
American foreign policy had two main goals. One was the ending of colonialism. The
other was that communism must be prevented from spreading. Great empires should
retreat, setting up model democracies in their stead – which, it was thought, would
naturally tend towards peace, secularism and liberal economics. In the case of India,
though, the United States feared that the exit of one ruling foreign power would create a
vacuum into which another would be sucked. There were two main contenders on
India’s borders – Mao’s China and Stalin’s Russia – and the acting Prime Minister,
Jawaharlal Nehru, was openly friendly with both. It did not take a great deal of

imagination to construct a ‘domino scenario’ whereby these two communist nations
begat communist India, and Washington did not intend to let events slide in that
direction.57
Jawaharlal Nehru may have occasioned some suspicion on grounds of his friendships,
but his family had used the war to carry out a brilliant public relations campaign in the
United States, signi cantly increasing that nation’s interest in Indian independence.
Nehru’s nieces Lekha and Tara Pandit, daughters of his sister Nan, had been sent to
Wellesley College during the war. They became popular with nationalist and civil rights
organizations, and were introduced to a miscellaneous collection of celebrities, including
Danny Kaye, Joan Crawford, and Helen Keller. The girls stayed with their Uncle
Jawahar’s old friend, and Edwina Mountbatten’s alleged lover, Paul Robeson.58 Swiftly,
it was made clear that o cial American opinion was keen to associate itself with the
cause of Indian independence. A pair of speckled orchids, tied with gold ribbons, was
sent to the girls, accompanied by a note saying, ‘Let me know if there is anything I can
do for you. I cannot do enough for Nehru’s nieces.’59 They had come from Louis
Johnson, President Roosevelt’s personal envoy to India. Johnson had cabled to
Roosevelt that Nehru had been ‘magni cent in his cooperation with me. The President
would like him and on most things they agree … He is our hope here.’60
The Nehru girls’ mother, Nan Pandit, visited them in December 1944. She also took
the opportunity to represent India at the Pacific Relations Conference. Nan lunched with
Eleanor Roosevelt in New York, and President Harry S. Truman at the White House. She
toured the country speaking in favour of Indian independence, in public and on the
radio. Her success was immediate. ‘I didn’t listen much to what you were saying, but
your voice is like moonbeams and honey and I love you and am on India’s side!’ said
one breathless male caller.61 The presence of this sophisticated Indian woman in their
midst only enhanced what the American government already thought. On 29 January
1945, Acting Secretary of State Joseph Grew told the media that the United States
‘would be happy to contribute in any appropriate manner to a satisfactory settlement.
We have close ties of friendship, both with the British and with the people of India.’62
American opinion had added weight, for the British government had no choice but to
borrow money from its prosperous ally. The loans Britain took from the United States to
nance the Second World War and subsequent reconstruction were so vast that the nal
payment would not be made until 31 December 2006. Meanwhile, Britain had quietly
stopped paying the loans – approaching £1 billion at 1947 rates – that the USA had lent
it for the First World War. Being so far in the Americans’ pocket was an invidious
situation. Britain was beginning to nd out what it was like to be the humbled
dependency of a much more powerful state.
Attlee did not like American interference in the India question any more than had
Churchill. ‘I do not like the idea of a statement by the USA on India,’ he said. ‘It looks
like a pat on the back to us from a rich uncle who sees us turning over a new leaf.’ He
noted, furthermore, that any intervention from America ‘would irritate the Moslems’.63
American diplomats leant heavily on Jinnah and Nehru to accept the Cabinet Mission’s

plan and get on with their own independence. But the Indian leaders would not be
squeezed out of their entrenchments.64
By the end of 1946 the Viceroy, Wavell, had lost the con dence of both sides of the
Indian nationalist movement. Gandhi began to canvass for his removal in September.65
By the end of November, Nehru, too, was publicly accusing him of favouring Jinnah.66
Jinnah wrote an impassioned letter to Attlee and a similar one to Churchill, accusing
Wavell of being under the thumb of Congress.67 Attlee realized, with his usual brisk
unsentimentality, that he was going to have to re Wavell. ‘A great man in many ways,
you know, but a curious silent bird, and I don’t think silent people get on very well with
Indians, who are very loquacious.’68 The search began for one who would not mind
talking to the Indians. Attlee considered the problem for some time before settling on his
candidate, Dickie Mountbatten – who had proven experience with ‘all kinds of people’,
and who was ‘blessed with a very unusual wife’.69 Attlee was under no illusions about
the anomaly of a semi-royal acting as a gurehead for democracy and freedom.
Privately, he con ded to friends that Dickie was ‘rather a Ruritanian gure, don’t you
think?’70
The description was apt, for since he had returned from South East Asia Mountbatten
had engaged himself almost full time in a project worthy of the Order of the Red Rose.
In one of the most daring bloodless coups ever attempted, he would install the House of
Mountbatten on the British throne – the same throne which, only thirty years before,
had ordered his father’s ruin. Mountbatten’s involvement in the marriage between his
nephew, Philippos Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg, and the King’s daughter,
Princess Elizabeth, can hardly be overstated. He introduced the couple, engineered
meetings between them, and went to great lengths in grooming Philip to become a
consort.
Philip’s credentials for marrying the world’s most eligible woman were tenuous. His
father was a playboy who had disappeared into the champagne-bars of the Côte d’Azur;
his mother, abandoned, had gone mad and become a nun; his sisters had all married
Nazis; he himself was only a naval lieutenant, and a penniless one at that. He had been
a prince of Greece before a coup ousted his family, but the revolution had left him poor
and nameless. He met Princess Elizabeth for the rst time on 22 July 1939, when the
royal family visited the Royal Naval College at Dartmouth under the proud supervision
of Dickie Mountbatten. Philip was eighteen years old; Elizabeth was thirteen, and
playing with a clockwork train. Their eyes met over lemonade and ginger biscuits, and
Philip was among the cadets invited to lunch on the royal yacht. There he impressed the
princesses by being able to jump high and eat an abnormal quantity of shrimp, though
not simultaneously. When the time came for the yacht to sail, the cadets followed in
rowboats and motorboats for a while; Elizabeth watched the tall, blond, strikingly
handsome Philip row his little boat further than anyone else.71
Less than eighteen months after the smitten Princess Elizabeth had watched her
handsome quasi-prince rowing after the royal yacht, the Conservative MP Chips
Channon spent a few days in Athens. He met Philip at a cocktail party and, during the
course of extensive gossiping, established that, ‘He is to be our Prince Consort, and that

is why he is serving in our Navy.’72 At this stage the prospect seemed improbable. The
Greek royals were impoverished, shabby and foreign. It was Dickie who organized a
campaign to fashion young Philip into an eligible naval hero. The most important factor
in this transformation would be to secure for him British nationality. For some reason,
no one – not even the genealogically preoccupied Mountbatten – remembered the 1705
Act of Naturalization of the Most Excellent Princess Sophia, Electress and Duchess
Dowager of Hanover, and the Issue of Her Body. As a descendant of Sophia, Philip had
been British since birth. Unaware of this, Mountbatten embarked upon a frenetic twoand-a-half-year campaign. On 23 August 1944, he ew from South East Asia Command
to Cairo, near Philip’s station at Alexandria, to ‘sound out’ Philip and the King of Greece
about whether the former could assume British nationality. He told the British High
Commissioner, incredibly, that the British King had ordered his secret mission, on the
grounds that Philip could ‘be an additional asset to the British Royal Family and a great
help to them in carrying out their royal functions’.73 In fact, the King had already
warned Mountbatten o : ‘I have been thinking the matter over since our talk and I have
come to the conclusion that we are going too fast’, he had written to him two weeks
before.74 Soundings were taken; they were, apparently, satisfactory; Mountbatten was
on the plane back to Karachi that same afternoon.
In October 1945, the matter of Philip’s naturalization came before the cabinet. Attlee
postponed any further discussion owing to the undesirability of aligning the British
government with the Greek royalist cause. But by then the teenaged Princess Elizabeth
was playing ‘People Will Say We’re in Love’ from the musical Oklahoma! non-stop on
her gramophone; and Philip had been seen helping her with a fur wrap at the wedding
of Mountbatten’s daughter Patricia. Mountbatten moved quickly, making personal
appointments with the King, the Prime Minister, and the Foreign Secretary, while
expending considerable e ort in enlightening his media contacts about Philip’s
gallantry.75 ‘Please, I beg of you, not too much advice in an a air of the heart’, Philip
wrote to his uncle, ‘or I shall be forced to do the wooing by proxy.’76
Mountbatten was summoned to meet the Prime Minister, Clement Attlee, for quite
another reason on 18 December 1946. According to Attlee, Dickie was taken aback at
the o er of the viceroyalty of India – ‘Bit of a shock for him, you know’ – and initially
was reluctant to accept owing to the probable hitch in his naval career.77 But the
consent of the Lords of the Admiralty for Mountbatten’s removal was obtained with
noteworthy ease.78 Even the King was keen: ‘Rather unexpectedly he warmly approved
of the idea right away,’ remembered Attlee. ‘Not everyone would let a member of the
royal family go and take a risky job, hit or miss, in India as he did.’79 It is hard not to
feel sympathy for a King who had recently endured several years of intense lobbying for
his daughter’s hand in marriage, and may well have had enough of Cousin Dickie for the
time being.
Aside from his naval career, there was another factor in Mountbatten’s reluctance to
accept the viceroyalty: Edwina. Bunny Phillips’s marriage had been hard on her; a giddy
romance with the conductor Malcolm Sargent had irritated her husband and daughters;
she su ered from arteriosclerosis, and would soon have to undergo a partial

hysterectomy. Dickie worried constantly about how hard she worked, her fragile health,
and her depression. Since the war ended, they had been presented with all sorts of
baubles, including the Freedom of the City of London, the Sword of Honour, and Dickie
a viscountcy – ‘though he expected an earldom’, according to one of their friends.80
‘Dickie got reduced in rank down to rear-admiral and Edwina wasn’t saving people all
day and night as she had been. I think, secretly, they were feeling a little low.’81
Despite his need for a new focus, there is plenty of evidence which indicates that
Mountbatten’s disinclination to take up the viceroyalty was genuine.82 Letter after letter
to Attlee shows Dickie setting up new and imaginative obstacles in his own path. First
he said he would only do the job ‘at the open invitation of the Indian parties’,83 which
was obviously impossible to obtain as it would have involved them agreeing. Next, he
demanded a complete change of policy as regarded viceregal protocol, so that he and
Edwina could visit Indians at will and unencumbered by sta . 84 This he was
unexpectedly granted. Finally, he hit upon the sticking point. On 7 January 1947, he
asked Attlee to set an ‘exact date for the termination of the British Raj’.85
The British government, in consultation with Wavell, had long been working to an
end-date of 31 March 1948. British troops were already being moved out of India; and,
after that time, Wavell considered that their numbers would have dipped below the
minimum required to maintain order.86 Attlee remembered in his memoirs: ‘I decided
that the only thing to do was to set a time-limit and say: “Whatever happens, our rule is
ending on that date.” It was, of course, a somewhat dangerous venture.’87
Even the most cursory glance at the letters between Attlee and Mountbatten reveals
this memory to be false. It was Mountbatten who pushed to set a rm date – Attlee
resisted. ‘My dear Dickie,’ he wrote on 9 January. ‘As at present advised we think it is
inadvisable to be too precise as to an actual day, but I will bear the point in mind.’88
Alarmed, Mountbatten replied: ‘I notice with some concern that it is now considered
inadvisable to name a precise and definite day.’89
‘I do not think that you need worry’, Attlee wrote back. ‘We shall get a clear
statement of timing, but an exact day of the month so long ahead would not be very
wise. There is no intention whatever of having any escape clause or of leaving any
doubt that within a definite time the handover will take place.’90
But Mountbatten would not back down, and refused to be satis ed with Attlee’s
suggestion that they agree on ‘the middle of 1948’.91 Still Attlee resisted. The reason for
his intransigence was that he was under intense pressure from the British administrators
in India not to set a date. A report by Sir Frederick Burrows, Governor of Bengal,
advised him that the announcement of a date would precipitate civil war, ‘massacres on
shocking scale (with Gandhi one of the rst victims) and famine’.92 Attlee received
similar notices from the governors of the Punjab and the United Provinces. Wavell sent
his personal opinion too, in the strongest terms: ‘I am sure that announcement about the
withdrawal in 1948 should not repeat not be made until after my successor has taken
o ce and has had at least a week or two to study situation. I do not think that it is fair
on him to have to take over situation which may already have developed unfavourably,
nor on me to have to carry out in my last few weeks of o ce a line of action which I

consider miss-timed [sic] and ill-judged.’93
Attlee communicated all this to Mountbatten, but the Viceroy-Designate refused to be
intimidated. On this point, the cabinet stood by him. The two arguments that had
swayed them in the past still convinced them now. First, that a rm deadline would
force the Indian parties to cooperate; second, that without one ‘we should be suspected,
as earlier Governments have been, of making communal di erences an excuse for
continuing British rule in India’.94 Attlee cabled all this to the royal train, then making
its way around South Africa. Once he had received the King’s nod, he announced the
new plan, the new viceroyalty and a date: 1 June 1948, exible to within one month. 95
Mountbatten’s instructions from Attlee, while vague in their wording, were clear enough
in their implication. It was the ‘de nite objective’ of His Majesty’s Government to
negotiate a plan for the transfer of power, with India or the divided bits of India
remaining in the British Commonwealth if possible. Mountbatten was to stop short of
compulsion. If his negotiations had reached no conclusion by 1 October 1947, Attlee had
mandated him to get Britain out in nine months at most, regardless of whether the
Indians were ready or not.96
Mountbatten’s appointment was widely greeted with a cheer. Congratulatory letters
poured into Broadlands, from friends, colleagues, journalists, ambassadors, members of
the public, the Hampshire Cricket Club, the Central Chancery of the Order of
Knighthood, David Joel Ltd (Manufacturers of Joinery and Furniture), and the entire
company of the London Ballet.97 Most were positive, though one of the bluntest
exceptions came from Admiral Sir Reginald Plunkett-Ernle-Erle-Drax. ‘Some people, I
gather, expect that, when we move out, Indian unrest will develop to a state bordering
on civil war’, he wrote. ‘Then Muslim & Hindu in India, like Jews & Arab in Palestine,
will continue to quarrel until one of the contending parties invites the Russians to come
in & help them. After that, the date of World War no. 3 is anybody’s guess. However, I
am v. ignorant of these problems & I trust that the pessimists are wrong. Every good
wish to you in your difficult task.’98
‘Thank you very much for your very kind letter of congratulation,’ replied
Mountbatten. ‘I appreciate all the kind things you say.’99
With immense dignity, Wavell refrained from criticizing his successor, though
privately he was furious at the abrupt manner of his dismissal. He busied himself by
lling the incinerators in the Viceroy’s House with stacks of documents that might have
caused embarrassment to the British – either by revealing their attitudes to Indian
political gures, or by detailing British mismanagement of India.100 The choice of
Mountbatten did attract some public criticism. Conservative MP Brendan Bracken
deplored Mountbatten’s closeness to Nehru, and described the former as ‘a miserable
creature, power-mad, publicity-mad’.101 Bracken was not the only one to notice the
Mountbatten–Nehru connection, and to draw the conclusion that there must be
something shy about it.102 The Associated Press of America reported that
Mountbatten’s appointment had been made to appease Nehru. Nehru denied this in a
terse statement, pointing out that he had met Mountbatten on just two previous
occasions: in Singapore in 1946, and once afterwards as Mountbatten was passing

through Delhi, when they discussed nothing more exciting than the transport of
paddy.103
Bracken and the AP had seized the wrong end of the stick. Nehru was suspicious about
Mountbatten’s appointment, and mistrustful of the man himself. Attlee’s announcement,
Nehru wrote to his London-based friend Krishna Menon, ‘has shaken people up here and
forced them to think furiously’.104 He went on: ‘The two men that Mountbatten is
bringing with him, Miéville and General Ismay, are not the type which inspires
con dence regarding Mountbatten’s outlook.’ He asked Menon to try to see
Mountbatten and get an impression of him. ‘Much will depend on what kind of a
directive Mountbatten is bringing with him, and how he intends to function here. He
can obviously make things easier or more difficult.’105
Poor, accident-prone Dickie, long known in the Admiralty as the ‘Master of
Disaster’106, had been given more power over 400 million subjects of the British KingEmperor than any preceding Viceroy.107 The task of reconciling the Indian politicians,
re-establishing public order and nding a formula for an independent India was
awesome, and quite beyond Mountbatten’s experience. India would have been within its
rights to panic but, from the British government’s point of view, Dickie’s appointment
had been a clever move. He was a gung-ho sort, and could be relied upon to remove
himself, and his nation, by any means necessary. And, by this stage, the British
government did not care much what means were necessary. The end was its only
concern.
On the evening of 18 March 1947, Dickie and Edwina held a farewell reception at the
Royal Automobile Club in Pall Mall. It was a double celebration for them. That very
morning, Mountbatten had secured a great victory, signalled by an announcement of
the super uous naturalization of Lieutenant Philip Mountbatten, RN, in the London
Gazette.108 He had planned to call his nephew ‘HRH Prince Philip’. Philip preferred to
start again as a commoner, but it is hard to imagine that Dickie had nothing to do with
his choice of surname. ‘Most people think that Dickie’s my father anyway,’ Philip later
acknowledged.109 With Philip’s engagement to the heiress presumptive soon to be
announced, the House of Mountbatten was now right at the front of the line for the
British throne.
At the reception that night, the Mountbattens stood for two hours to meet their 700
guests, including a smattering of royals, the Prime Minister, various India-related
politicians, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and copious servicemen. Also in attendance,
as usual, was Noël Coward. Dickie and Edwina’s cocktail party put him in a pensive
mood. ‘I wonder if they will come back alive’, he wrote in his diary that evening. ‘I
think that if it is possible to make a go of it in the circumstances they will, but I have
some forebodings.’110 He was not the only one. As Mountbatten climbed aboard his
aeroplane at Northolt the next day, he said to his aide-de-camp: ‘I don’t want to go.
They don’t want me out there. We’ll probably come home with bullets in our backs.’111
A sense of foreboding was justi ed. The next fteen months were to be the most
dangerous, the most triumphant, the most terrifying, the most passionate, and the most
controversial of the Mountbattens’ lives.

PART II
THE END

CHAPTER 10: OPERATION MADHOUSE

plane to Palam Air eld, south-west of New
A RELATIVELY SMALL GATHERING AWAITED THE DESCENT OF A
Delhi, in the early afternoon of 22 March 1947. In it were representatives of the Muslim
League and Congress, whose appearances a well-informed bystander would have had no
trouble decoding. Liaquat Ali Khan, General Secretary of the Muslim League, wore a
European suit with an astrakhan Jinnah cap. Jawaharlal Nehru, e ective leader of
Congress, wore a Gandhi cap and Indian sherwani suit. The 14th Punjab Regiment, the
Royal Air Force and the Royal Indian Air Force had mounted guards of honour for the
occasion. A collection of photographers waited in the heat, polishing the dust from their
lenses.
The York transporter plane made its lazy approach to the runway. The wheels came
down, the back end sank to meet the tarmac, the nose levelled, and the aircraft juddered
to a halt. As the four engines whirred down into silence, the door opened and a group of
people emerged into the Delhi haze. Foremost among these was Viscount Mountbatten
of Burma, the new Viceroy-Designate, forty-six years old, handsome and gleaming in his
full dress uniform, with rows of medals stretching from breastbone to armpit. (He had
originally been advised to turn up in plain clothes. Disappointed, he referred the matter
to the Labour MP Woodrow Wyatt, who reassured him that the government would send
a band and a delegation, and that he could therefore appear in full g.1) Following the
Viceroy-Designate was Viscountess Mountbatten, in a chocolate brown suit.
In her husband’s words, Lady Mountbatten was ‘looking absolutely terri c, absolutely
knock-down charm, marvellous gure’.2 She had recovered physically from her illness
that spring, but had no desire to be in India – describing the posting as a ‘horror job’.3
There had been a hint of sullenness on the ight, when Edwina had shocked her sta by
stu ng the diamond tiara her husband had specially designed and bought for her into
an old shoebox and chucking it carelessly into an overhead rack.4 But her knock-down
charm was back on as she lingered on the red carpet, chatting to Liaquat and Nehru.
The Mountbattens drove to the Viceroy’s House, where they were greeted by the Royal
Scots Fusiliers and Lord and Lady Wavell. A lone British officer in the crowd attempted a
cheer, which petered out in the gloomy silence. ‘Is nobody happy here?’ he asked, but
those nearby pretended not to have heard.5
Lords Mountbatten and Wavell withdrew to the latter’s study for a manly word, while
Edwina retired to her new apartments. She had brought a Sealyham terrier, Mizzen,
with her, and asked for something to feed it. Half an hour later, two servants turned up,
bearing roast chicken on a silver salver. Edwina froze at the sight. Seizing the plate over
Mizzen’s barking head, she ran into the bathroom, locked herself in and ate the lot.6
This incident has usually been omitted by biographers, perhaps because to modern eyes

a story about an extremely thin woman who locks herself in a bathroom to eat looks
uncomfortably like evidence of an eating disorder. It originally appeared in a
Mountbatten-sanctioned version of events, interpreted as a response to rationing back
in Britain. But Dickie and Edwina had just own to India in considerable luxury,
breaking their journey at the British High Commands in Malta and Suez, and it is
unlikely they were starved on the way. Under the circumstances, it is hard not to see the
incident as a demonstration of Edwina’s unhappiness.
Meanwhile, her husband was being briefed by his predecessor on the situation he was
about to inherit. Mountbatten’s memory of his meeting with Wavell, recounted much
later in life to his pet historians Dominique Lapierre and Larry Collins, has the spin of
an old sea-yarn to it. According to Dickie, Wavell escorted him into the study, shut the
heavy teak doors behind them, and opened with: ‘I am sorry indeed that you’ve been
sent out here in my place.’
‘Well, that’s being candid,’ Mountbatten shot back. ‘Why? Don’t you think I’m up to
it?’
‘No,’ Wavell is supposed to have replied, ‘indeed, I’m very fond of you, but you’ve
been given an impossible task. I’ve tried everything I know to solve this problem and I
can see no light.’ He gloomily opened his safe, and removed from it the diamond badge
of the Grand Master of the Order of the Star of India, along with a plain manila le
entitled ‘Operation Madhouse’. ‘Alas,’ the departing Viceroy lamented, handing over the
badge and file, ‘I can see no other way out.’7
The words Mountbatten attributes to Wavell do not recall that o cer’s usual brusque
tone.8 Nor does the supposed a ection of Wavell for his successor ring true. And no
manila le called ‘Operation Madhouse’ has found its way into the British or Indian
National Archives, though Wavell does refer to a similar plan called the ‘Breakdown
Plan’ in his diary.9 ‘Wavell was frankly pretty defeatist by then,’ Attlee recalled. ‘He
produced a plan worked out by his ICS advisers for the evacuation of India with
everybody moving from where they were by stages right up through the Ganges valley
till eventually, apparently, they would be collected at Karachi and Bombay and sail
away. Well, I thought that was what Winston would certainly quite properly describe as
an ignoble and sordid scuttle and I wouldn’t look at it.’10 This description is unfair, for
the plan was less about panic than pragmatism. Wavell believed that the great
achievement of the raj was the uni cation of India. He also knew that the partition of
the same would be incendiary. It was, he thought, in Britain’s best interests to stand well
back before lighting the touch-paper. He wanted to hand over power gradually to
democratic provinces and Indian princedoms, in localized groups, while retaining British
jurisdiction at the centre. When all the bits and pieces were under Indian control, the
British could bow out discreetly – leaving the Indians to deal with the civil war that
would almost certainly be left behind.
The Breakdown Plan was far from perfect, and made no attempt to save the Indian
people from disaster. But the point was that the disaster would not be occurring on
Britain’s watch. Moreover, it was what Congress had been demanding for years: that
Britain simply quit India. Yet it had not been thought acceptable in Whitehall – partly

because the resulting civil war would re ect badly on Britain, but also because it would
not work quickly enough. According to the Indian government’s political adviser, Sir
Conrad Cor eld, the American government was now leaning on London ‘to confer on
India the advantages of undiluted democracy as soon as possible’.11 The Americans were
ever more concerned about the outward creep of communism from Russia and China,
and cannot have been reassured by the fact that, a week before Mountbatten’s
viceroyalty began, British intelligence services reported the rst clear case of direct
nancial aid passing from the Soviets to the Communist Party in India.12 That same
week, the British Foreign Secretary, Ernest Bevin, had been in Moscow: Stalin told him
that Russia would not interfere in Indian independence, but noted that it was a time of
grave dangers. This did not placate the British. ‘It would clearly be imprudent to take
Stalin’s profession of non-interference at its face value, particularly having regard to
certain recent signs to the contrary’, wrote the India Secretary, Lord Pethick-Lawrence,
to Mountbatten.13 Suddenly, the focus of President Truman’s campaign against
communism shifted from Greece and Turkey – which had been worrying the United
States for some weeks – abruptly eastwards.
The morning after the Mountbattens’ arrival, the Wavells departed with dignity and
cordial handshakes, their plane taking o promptly at ten. Most of Delhi’s white
population was dismayed to see them go. Wavell’s directness and unemotional approach
had made him popular; the manner of his sacking had predisposed many to dislike his
successor. Mountbatten’s press attaché, Alan Campbell-Johnson, had already discovered
that the consensus in Delhi was against his master.14 The Europeans felt that he knew
nothing about India and was little more than a playboy. The fact that Mountbatten
spent his rst day arranging press and photography for his grand swearing-in did little
to contradict their view.
On the bright Monday morning of 24 March, the dignitaries of British India
congregated at the Viceroy’s House, under the massive gold dome and ornate
chandeliers of the Durbar Hall. English gentlemen in tailcoats and pith helmets strode
up the steps alongside turbaned Sikhs; Indian ladies in silk saris chatted to Congressmen
in homespun kurtas; princes glittered in their ancient jewels. The crowd hushed as a
fanfare of trumpets heralded Dickie and Edwina’s appearance through the back doors:
he a handsome prince in shining regalia with a sword clasped by his side, she a beautiful
princess in a owing gown of ivory brocade, with that carelessly treated diamond tiara
flashing brilliant sparkles of light back at the photographers.
The Mountbattens marched sedately and in perfect synchrony up the aisle, an ethereal
and slender pair of white-clad and gold-strewn presences, shimmering in the crowded
hall. They came to a halt in front of two enormous thrones under a towering scarletdraped canopy, and turned towards each other, then around to face their audience and
a salvo of exploding ashbulbs. 15 Surrounded as he was by all these new and exciting
out ts, the Viceroy pu ed up with delight. ‘What a ceremony!’ Mountbatten
remembered later in life. ‘I put on everything. My white full dress uniform. Orders,
decorations, medals, the whole lot … Obviously, I wore the Garter. Then I wore the Star
of India, I was the Grand Master of the Order, I wore the Star of the Indian Empire, and

then I wore the Victorian Order and that made the four; that’s all you’re allowed to
wear. And I wore the aiguillettes as personal ADC to the King Emperor.’16
It is easy to laugh at Mountbatten’s obsession with decorating himself, and with his
fussing over protocol. But these trivialities were prerequisites for the job. A large portion
of the Viceroy’s responsibilities had to do with awarding honours, remembering faces,
seating people appropriately at parties, writing correct letters and invitations,
remembering how to address the divorced wife of the second son of an earl after she had
remarried a sea captain, and so on. In all of these matters, Mountbatten’s skills were
peerless. But the key to perfect protocol is knowing when to break it, and Mountbatten
had reserved a surprise for his audience. ‘This is not a normal viceroyalty on which I am
embarking,’ he admitted, in a forthright address which newspapers back in London
reported with some shock. ‘Every one of us must do what he can to avoid any word or
action which might lead to further bitterness or add to the toll of innocent victims,’ he
said. ‘I am under no illusion about the di culty of my task. I shall need the greatest
good will of the greatest possible number and I am asking India today for that good
will.’17 This was the sound of the British Empire owning up to its limitations, and the old
guard of the raj might have been outraged. Fortunately, the acoustics in the hall were so
bad that few could hear. Nevertheless, both Nehru and Liaquat were observed to be
paying very close attention and, during the last sentence, even the poised Lady
Mountbatten could be seen to turn her head slightly to look at her husband.18
Mountbatten had established his style with immediate e ect. The new regime was to be
frank, inclusive and open-minded. It was now full steam ahead to the transfer of power,
and the old guard could come on board or stay on shore as they pleased.
During the week that followed, Mountbatten’s vision of sophisticated imperial
elegance rapidly deteriorated. His wife was miserable; the parade of Indian leaders
through his study conjured up a portent of insoluble quarrels; and, above all, the full
horror of India’s communal violence would set in. Tension in the Punjab had been
tightening for years, owing to the visible economic di erence between wealthy casteHindus and Sikhs, and relatively impoverished, labouring Muslims. That March, it had
nally snapped. The worst riots in a century had left thousands dead, mostly Sikhs
massacred by Muslims in Rawalpindi and Multan.19 On the very day after Mountbatten
arrived, rioting broke out in Delhi itself. Chandni Chowk is the main street of Old Delhi,
running from the Lahore Gate to the Red Fort. Its wide avenue was lined with stalls
selling the requisites of Delhi life: ne woven dupattas, sweet lassi, festive tinsel. Amid
the labyrinth of alleyways and bazaars running o the Chowk are diverse shrines,
including one of the Sikhs’ most important temples, the Sisganj Gurdwara, and India’s
largest mosque, the Jama Masjid. The district was a tinderbox for trouble, loaded that
day by a Muslim meeting at the mosque in support of Pakistan, and ignited, according
to eyewitnesses, by the ‘recklessly provocative behaviour’ of Sikh protesters. The Sikhs
arrived at the busy marketplace in two lorries and assorted jeeps, and ‘careered about’,
brandishing swords. (The Chief Commissioner of Delhi noted rather ippantly that this
had the e ect of ‘accidentally injuring some Muslims’. 20) At least two people were killed
and six seriously injured.21 It was not much of a welcome party for the new Viceroy.

Perhaps with the safety of the Mountbattens in mind, the district magistrate imposed
draconian edicts. For seven days, a curfew would run from 6 p.m. until 7 a.m. For a
fortnight, no group of more than ve individuals would be permitted to assemble for
any purpose. For a week, all newspapers, commentary, photographs and even cartoons
would be subject to o cial censorship. These measures did not make much di erence.
On 25 March, the Chief Commissioner, apparently long past the point of taking his
reports seriously, wrote that ‘the night passed peacefully except for a certain amount of
shouting’, and noted that there had been seven stabbing and brickbatting incidents on
the previous day, in which eleven people had been injured. A police picket had opened
re when it was set upon by a mob armed with stones, a number of arrests had been
made and ‘some bad characters have also been rounded up’. He concluded that, ‘All is
quiet today up to the time of writing (10.30 A.M.),’ which was not much of a boast.
Indeed, another hand added below that, ‘After lunch some stabbings and a clash by the
Jumna [sic] Masjid.’22
If the local situation seemed bad, the national was far worse. On the Wednesday after
Dickie and Edwina’s arrival, riots broke out in Calcutta, killing 8 and injuring 111
Patna, the police went on strike and occupied the arms depot at Gaya; the Prime
Minister of Bihar blamed communists. By Thursday, casualties in Calcutta had risen to
fourteen, and res ripped through the east of the city. The police were rapidly losing
control. First they attempted to subdue the mob with tear gas; when that did not work,
they resorted to bullets, and fired eighteen rounds into the crowd.
By Friday, the Punjab was incongruously quiet – but only, said The Times, because ‘all
the members of one community or the other either [had been] slaughtered or [had]
fled’.23 In Amritsar, 160 lay dead in the streets after rioting. Fourteen policemen were
injured at riots in Mardan, in the North-West Frontier Province. Back in Calcutta, a
further eight were killed and thirty-two injured when bombs were thrown. The police
gave up, and called in the Army.
The next Sunday, 30 March, was the god-king Rama’s birthday, a day of celebrations
for Hindus. In Calcutta, it was celebrated with even greater rioting, which spread across
the Hooghly River to the industrial city of Howrah. The death toll rose again, amid
stabbings, bombings and the throwing of acid: 46 dead, 400 injured. In Bombay, a
deceptive peace was broken in the evening when three separate riots broke out. Bombs
were thrown, and temples set ablaze. Muslims and Hindus pitched battles in the city,
ghting with clubs, knives, iron bars and whatever weapons they could improvise. The
police were attacked, and responded with gun re. Hundreds were injured, and dozens
killed: the bodies lay uncounted in the streets. A car was ambushed and its four
passengers imprisoned inside by the mob while they set it alight. The passengers burned
alive, screaming for mercy. The next day, all that remained was four human skeletons
within the burnt-out metal skeleton of their car.
While all this was going on, Mountbatten had to meet the Indian leaders. For that first
week, the two least compromising and highestpro le among them declined his
invitation – though he had been so anxious to meet these two in particular that he had
written to each of them before his viceroyalty had begun.24 Mohammad Ali Jinnah,

representing the Muslim League, remained in Bombay, making in ammatory speeches.
Mohandas Gandhi, representing Mohandas Gandhi, was living among the outcastes in
distant Bihar, and refused to take advantage of the viceregal aircraft. Among those
Mountbatten did meet, the impression was already less than encouraging. Many of the
princes seemed determined to press for the independence of their states, rather than
transferring their allegiance to an independent India – a plan which would fragment the
subcontinent into dozens, perhaps hundreds, of private kingdoms. The Maharaja of
Bikaner blamed the Nawab of Bhopal for dividing the princes along communal lines.
The Nawab of Bhopal said the Maharaja of Bikaner was nothing more than a patsy of
Congress. Both begged Mountbatten not to let the British leave India at all.25 This
opinion was not con ned to the princes. John Matthai, the Minister for Transport, told
him that, ‘But for Congress, there was no body in India which would not move Heaven
and Earth to keep the British.’26 Other politicians presented further unexpected
di culties. Liaquat Ali Khan subtly suggested that Mountbatten must have made his
controversial swearing-in address at the behest of Congress. Mountbatten vehemently
denied it, but Liaquat said that three highly placed sources had told him it was so.27
Vallabhbhai Patel of Congress, ominously nicknamed ‘the Iron Man’, was a forceful
Hindu-nationalist lawyer, clever and cool. He was impervious to Mountbatten’s famous
charm, describing the new Viceroy as ‘a toy for Jawaharlalji to play with – while we
arrange the revolution’.28
Only one man seemed to o er a glimmer of hope. ‘Pandit Nehru struck me as most
sincere,’ Dickie wrote after their rst meeting on 24 March, and praised his ‘fairness of
mind’. But even this interview promised greater problems yet to come. Nehru spoke at
length about Jinnah, but was too astute to impugn his nemesis openly. Instead, he
managed with great subtlety to sow in Mountbatten’s mind the seeds of ill favour,
perhaps realizing – either consciously or unconsciously – that criticism always bites
harder when it comes dressed up as praise. Thus Jinnah, he said, was ‘one of the most
extraordinary men in history’, and a ‘ nancially successful though mediocre lawyer’,
who avoided taking any action that might split his party, such as holding debates or
answering questions. The assessment had the taint of sour grapes to it, but Mountbatten
did not seem to notice.29 Three days later, Jinnah made a speech in Bombay that
con rmed Nehru’s picture of him as a thorn in everyone’s side. He alleged that the
British had deliberately conspired against the Muslims: trying to force them into staying
in India rather than creating their own state of Pakistan, in order to produce greater
bloodshed and destruction after the raj’s departure.30 He was in a better position than
anyone else in India to know that the opposite was true, for the person who had been
attempting to conspire with the British to create Pakistan for more than seven years was
Jinnah himself.
While the Viceroy struggled to generate a rapport with the Indians, his Vicereine was
doing far better. Edwina began by entertaining the wives of her husband’s guests but,
within a couple of days of arriving, she established her own political network. In the
rst few days, she sought out and befriended Gandhi’s right-hand woman, Amrit Kaur,
who was to become one of her greatest friends and the new government’s Minister for

Health; Vallabhbhai Patel’s in uential daughter, Maniben; Liaquat’s wife, the Begum
Ra’ana Liaquat Ali Khan, who like Edwina herself was deeply involved in health and
welfare work; the Untouchable leader, B.R. Ambedkar; the radical feminist Kamaladevi
Chattopadhyaya; and the poet and politician Sarojini Naidu, who coincidentally had
been a childhood friend of her mother’s.31 Very few of the women or, indeed, the men
she met had ever been allowed into the Viceroy’s House before.
Women were prominent in Indian politics, a trend which Edwina Mountbatten, along
with many Indian women, attributed to Gandhism. Non-violence, passive resistance and
boycotts were all tactics which could be practised by women without breaking social
conventions; and Nehru had insisted as early as 1937 that the Congress manifesto
pledge to remove all social, economic and political discrimination against women. As a
result, there were more powerful women in India’s Congress than there were in Britain’s
Labour Party or in America’s Democratic Party at the time. The Muslim League, too, had
Fatima Jinnah and the Begum Liaquat, uno cial but signi cant and visible gures, at
the highest level. As Edwina would later tell an audience in London, ‘We shall have to
wake up in this country when we see how the women of India have achieved
emancipation to such a remarkable degree in spite of the backwardness of the country,
the illiteracy of the people, the low standard of life, and all kinds of disadvantages from
the point of view of religious feeling and other obstacles.’32
For years Edwina had been looking for a role in which she could actually do
something and, to her surprise, it would be in India that she found it. One of her most
important friendships was quickly established with the sharp and personable Congress
politician Vijaya Lakshmi ‘Nan’ Pandit. ‘Edwina plunged headlong into informality,’
remembered Nan. ‘Politics were forgotten and women discussed women’s problems.’33
But it was with Nan’s brother, Jawaharlal Nehru, that she formed the most important
connection of all.
Jawahar and Edwina became close almost immediately on her arrival. Shahid Hamid,
the private secretary to Field Marshal Sir Claude Auchinleck, alleged that Edwina’s
relationship with Jawahar was ‘su ciently close to have raised many eyebrows’ by 31
March 1947 – and claimed to have heard the gossip from Nehru’s con dant, Krishna
Menon.34 At rst glance this seems implausible, not least because Hamid’s memoirs have
been widely disputed. By 31 March, the Mountbattens had been in India for only a
week. Yet even so quickly it is possible to be attracted to a person, to feel a sympathy
with them and even to develop the beginnings of a romantic attachment. They were
together remarkably often during that rst week, and the informality of their friendship
was obvious. He addressed a meeting of the Red Cross; she accompanied him, and
photographs show her looking up at him, enraptured. At the reception for delegates of
the Asian Relations Conference on 28 March, the pair drew their armchairs together for
an involved conversation. In one photograph, Nehru is being interrupted, and looks
startled. Lady Mountbatten, elegant in a long oral-print dress, has her attention
focused entirely on the Congress leader. That same evening, at the Mountbattens’ rst
garden party, there was a shortage of chairs during a dance recital. The yogic Jawahar
forsook his, and instead sat cross-legged on the oor at Edwina’s feet. After the party,

Edwina accompanied Jawahar back to his house on York Road for a nightcap – with her
daughter, but without her husband.35
In March 1957, Edwina would write to Jawahar that it was the anniversary of ‘Ten
years … monumental in their history and so powerful in the e ects on our personal
lives.’ Simultaneously, he wrote to her that March 1957 marked ‘Ten years!’36 Even if
their close friendship had not yet developed a romantic aspect, it is obvious that it had
been firmly established.
To Lord Mountbatten, this rst week of Indian reality had come as a nasty shock. While
Edwina began to nd her footing, Dickie rapidly lost his. When he wrote the rst of his
personal reports to London on 31 March, India – with its impossible politicians, its
religious combustions, its villages laid to waste by bloodthirsty mobs, its corpses in
burnt-out cars, its tangled, ghastly web of tensions, histories and grievances, and the
enormous weight of expectation to x all of this laid heavily upon his shoulders – had
already reduced the beaming new Viceroy of 24 March to jelly. Aghast, he wrote to
Attlee:
The scene here is one of unrelieved gloom … At this early stage I can see little ground on which to build any agreed
solution for the future of India. The Cabinet is fiercely divided on communal lines; each party has its own solution and
does not at present show any sign of being prepared to consider another.
In addition, the whole country is in a most unsettled state … The only conclusion that I have been able to come to is
that unless I act quickly I may well find the real beginnings of a civil war on my hands.37
If anything, Mountbatten was understating the case. The real beginnings of civil war
were already on his hands, and he was in no position to deal with them. Britain had
only 11,400 soldiers in India (a number which would fall to 4000 over the course of the
twelve months from April 1947), and the country had been in a state of unrest for at
least a year.38 Only one man had ever seemed capable of holding back this swelling tide
– and he was the elderly Gujarati who would meet the new Viceroy for the first time that
afternoon.
Mohandas Gandhi arrived at ve o’clock, a tiny, yweight gure leaning on Maniben
Patel for support. He posed for photographs in the afternoon sun with the
Mountbattens, and formed an instant bond with Edwina. As they went back into the
house, Gandhi rested his hand on the Vicereine’s shoulder – a gesture of fellowship,
acceptance and trust which he habitually reserved for his ashramites. Most of the
photographers were already packing up their equipment, but one shutter in the garden
clicked. The next morning, the image it captured was on front pages across the world.
Whether Gandhi formed so immediate a connection with Lord Mountbatten is
uncertain. Back inside the Viceroy’s House, Edwina made an excuse to leave, so that her
husband and the Mahatma could get down to business. They did not. Gandhi rst
assured Mountbatten that he would come back for two hours every day that week; then
started to tell his life story. ‘I felt there was no hurry and deemed it advisable to let him
talk along any lines that entered his head,’ noted Mountbatten cautiously. Two hours

later, having spoken at great length of his legal training in England, his life in South
Africa, and his travels in India, and not at all about a settlement for independence, the
Mahatma got up and left. The Viceroy was slightly bemused, but determined to remain
upbeat. ‘We parted at 7.15, both of us, I am sure, feeling that we had progressed along
the path of friendship.’39
The next day Gandhi returned, bringing an ascetic meal of curds to take under a tree
in the garden while the Viceroy pointlessly o ered him tea and scones. The Mahatma
launched upon an unsuspecting Mountbatten his plan to quell the bubbling discontent
between Hindu and Muslim. It was an extraordinary suggestion. Jinnah was to be made
Prime Minister, and could form a cabinet entirely composed of Muslims if he wished.
Congress would agree to cooperate freely and sincerely. This would, Gandhi believed,
satisfy the Muslims that the new India was not to be a ‘Hindustan’, and that their rights
and freedoms would be represented.
That day was April Fool’s Day, but Gandhi’s scheme was not a joke. He intended that
Jinnah should be o ered a chance to form an exclusively Islamic cabinet, despite the
fact that the Muslim population of India was only around 25 per cent, with the majority
Congress Party meekly serving beneath them, and apparently did not foresee any
potential upset in the already in amed Hindu and Sikh communities as a consequence
of this. Nor did he acknowledge that an arti cially constructed and undemocratic
minority government would represent a continuation of what India had most loathed
about the British raj: it would mean the rule of a very vast number of people by the
unelected elite of a culture radically di erent from their own. Such a government would
have had no real chance of success, and must quickly have fallen or been toppled after
the British had left. At that point, it could only have been replaced by a predominantly
Hindu administration. Moreover, in case Jinnah were wise enough to refuse the
leadership, Gandhi proposed a codicil. If Jinnah would not form a cabinet, the same
o er was to be made to Congress, with the Muslim League acting as obedient
handmaidens to a purely Congress rule. Either way, it was virtually guaranteed to result
in disaster for India’s 100 million Muslims, the sidelining of the Muslim League, and the
ultimate domination of Congress. The scheme was so risky, and the probable result so
obvious, that many Muslims thought Gandhi was conspiring to discredit Jinnah and
ensure the long-term goal of a Hindu nationalist state.40
Gandhi had put forward the same idea several times in the past, and it had been
dismissed by previous viceroys as impossible.41 By 1947, even Gandhi’s colleagues in
Congress were beginning to suspect that he had gone ‘a bit senile’.42 Mountbatten
described himself as ‘staggered’ by Gandhi’s suggestion, but was not yet sure enough of
his balance to dismiss the plan outright.43 Nehru was more realistic, and told him it
would not work. A note of frustration had become discernible lately in Nehru’s tone
when he spoke of the Mahatma. He described the old man as ‘going round with
ointment trying to heal one sore spot after another on the body of India, instead of
diagnosing the cause of this eruption of sores and participating in the treatment of the
body as a whole’.44 A couple of weeks later, Gandhi was forced to drop the plan on the
grounds that Congress was not prepared to accept it. The rejection prompted his

withdrawal from formal involvement in negotiations for the transfer of power, though
he would continue to contribute from the sidelines.45
Mountbatten’s initial meetings with Gandhi had been bad. His meetings with Jinnah
would be worse. The Viceroy decided that he would open with the same gambit that
Gandhi had used on him: to leave politics aside in the rst instance, and instead chat
about himself. And so he launched cheerfully into the story of his Indian tour with the
Prince of Wales in the twenties, his engagement to Edwina in Delhi, his exploits as
Supremo and so forth, to the bewilderment of his guest. ‘He could not see why we should
not talk business at once,’ Mountbatten remembered, ‘but nally resigned himself to
listen to my Indian reminiscences.’46 Fortunately, Mountbatten was interrupted by the
arrival of some press photographers. With Lady Mountbatten joining them,
Mountbatten and Jinnah went into the gardens to have their pictures taken. ‘A rose
between two thorns,’ quipped Jinnah – slightly too late, for Edwina had just moved
around from between them to Jinnah’s left-hand side, casting her in the role of a thorn,
and him in the role of the rose. Some historians have hinted that Jinnah’s faux pas may
not have been entirely unintentional.47 Mountbatten assumed it was, and roared with
laughter. Either way, the joke thawed the atmosphere. After they returned to the study,
Mountbatten reported that Jinnah relaxed considerably and even started talking about
his own background and life in London. ‘In fact we ended on a surprisingly friendly
note. He had come in haughty and frigid but the joke at the photograph had suddenly
unfrozen him and I felt we had begun to make friends and would be able to do business
together.’48
It is safe to say that Mountbatten and Jinnah never ended up making friends. Much
has been made of the former calling the latter various unpleasant names in his notes –
including ‘psychopathic case’, ‘bastard’ and ‘evil genius’.49 The remarks presented in
context appear less o ensive, for Mountbatten was in the habit of writing very lively
notes. It is easy enough to nd him calling Nehru ‘a demagogue’ and ‘reprehensible’,
Patel ‘hysterical’, and Gandhi ‘an inveterate and dangerous Trotskyist’.50 At rst, both
Mountbattens tried hard with the Jinnahs. When Jinnah returned the evening after their
rst meeting to dine at the Viceroy’s House with his sister Fatima, they stayed until well
after midnight, and according to Mountbatten ‘the ice was really broken’.51 He was
adamant that Jinnah should be brought into the government to work alongside Nehru.
When he suggested this to Jinnah, it did not go down well. ‘If I had invited the Pope to
take part in the Black Mass,’ Mountbatten reported to London, ‘he could not have been
more horrified.’52
‘Dickie and I have of course found the Jinnahs the most di cult,’ Edwina admitted to
Isobel Cripps. They were personally charming, she said, and remarkably intelligent: ‘I
cannot help but liking [sic] them both very much indeed.’ But she and Dickie despaired
of getting them to compromise. ‘Yet one sympathises so much with their fears and
apprehensions and wants to do everything one can to give the necessary safeguards and
as fair a deal as is humanly possible.’53 Edwina had Fatima to tea that week, and struck
up a conversation about how encouraging it had been to see Muslim and Hindu students
integrating happily at Lady Irwin College. ‘Don’t be misled by the apparent

contentment of the Muslim girls there,’ Fatima told her, bleakly; ‘we haven’t been able
to start our propaganda in that college yet.’54
It is impossible to dismiss the notion that Fatima Jinnah’s coolness to Edwina
Mountbatten may have been informed by the latter’s close and obvious friendships with
Gandhi and Nehru. Previous vicereines had not gone visiting Gandhi’s hut in the
sweeper colony; they had certainly not gone alone to dine with the handsome widower
Nehru. Edwina did both, and regularly. Fatima Jinnah was a perceptive woman, wellconnected in political circles, and can hardly have been unaware of Edwina’s friendship
with her brother’s rival. Whether or not she believed the more scandalous gossip, it is
only logical that the connection with Jawahar would have raised suspicions that Edwina
had a leaning towards Congress. Any further suspicion that Mountbatten might be
in uenced by his wife would have been well founded. Dickie’s interest in Asian politics
had, by his own admission, followed Edwina’s.
As April began, the situation in the country at large was getting worse, and little was
being done about it. On 6 April, it was reported that riots had left 350 dead and 4000
homeless in the town of Gurgaon, around 20 miles from Delhi on the road to Jaipur;
from Noakhali came reports of people being roasted alive.55 Gandhi went on a twentyfour-hour fast ‘to vindicate swaraj through Hindu–Muslim unity, hand spinning, and the
like.’56 It did not achieve much, but it was more than the Viceroy could do. Just four
days later, on 11 April, ve major cities – Calcutta, Delhi, Amritsar, Agra and Peshawar
– were placed under curfew following riots. In Calcutta, a food shortage was beginning
to hit. The market and most of the shops were closed. Great heaps of rubbish had been
piling up in the streets for a fortnight, for the Untouchable sweepers were too scared to
perform their normal function.57 The simultaneous collapse of public hygiene and public
nutrition had predictable consequences in the form of a cholera epidemic. Three hundred
and fty people had been admitted to hospital already, the numbers increasing
exponentially.
On 15 April, something hopeful happened at last, when Gandhi and Jinnah issued a
joint proclamation against violence. It was not a sign of any softening in their personal
relationship. The two men had not seen each other for two and a half years, and did not
even meet to discuss their joint declaration. Mountbatten had asked Jinnah to appeal
for a truce in the communal disturbances in conjunction with Congress.58 Jinnah had
agreed, but only on the grounds that the ‘unknown nobody’ of a Congress President, J.B.
Kripalani, should not be invited to sign.59 Gandhi agreed to sign it in Kripalani’s place,
telling Mountbatten that it was a great political step and that he was pleased to have
given him the idea in the rst place. ‘Although I have absolutely no recollection of Mr
Gandhi making any such suggestion,’ Mountbatten noted, ‘I felt it would be politic not
to point this out. For although I believed it to have been my own idea I am only too
delighted that he should take the credit.’ He was not, however, convinced by Gandhi’s
motives. At the same meeting, Gandhi asked Mountbatten to hand over full control of
unpartitioned India to the interim government. Mountbatten answered that he could
not, for it would mean handing over the reins to Congress and ignoring the Muslim
League, which would precipitate civil war. Gandhi replied with a smile that, by signing

the declaration, Jinnah had forsworn violence in perpetuity: he could not start a civil
war now, even if he wanted to. Mountbatten was deeply shocked. It seemed to him that
Gandhi was proposing to take advantage of Jinnah’s good intentions to crush Muslim
dissent. ‘I find it hard to believe that I correctly understood Mr Gandhi’, he wrote.60
Whatever its motives, the joint declaration was a signi cant diplomatic achievement.
But it proved only that Jinnah had as little control over Muslim India as Gandhi had
over the Hindus. Communal violence continued across the entire subcontinent,
increasing in Delhi, Calcutta, Bombay, Peshawar and Cawnpore. Within days of the
proclamation, newspapers were reporting that the North-West Frontier Province had
descended into chaos, with widespread arson attacks and brutal violence against the
Hindu minority. The situation became so awful that Mountbatten was obliged to take
action. He did so, as usual, by calling a meeting in Delhi. Mountbatten, Nehru and Sir
Olaf Caroe, Governor of the North-West Frontier Province, congregated at the Viceroy’s
House on 18 April. Khan Abdul Jabbar Khan, Prime Minister of the North-West Frontier
Province, was summoned away from his erupting province and own by RAF special
aircraft from Peshawar to join in. It was agreed that all non-violent political prisoners
in NWFP jails would be released, which seemed like a step forward; but most of the 5000
prisoners refused to leave their prisons.61
The North-West Frontier was far from the only problem on the Viceroy’s plate.
Mountbatten went straight from that meeting into another with the Sikh leaders Tara,
Kartar and Baldev Singh, who demanded partition of the Punjab, and hinted that they
aimed at an independent state or province of their own. Khalistan, or ‘Sikhistan’ as it
was nicknamed, was to include Simla and perhaps even Lahore.62 ‘Any hopes that I still
entertained of being able to avoid the partition of the Punjab if Pakistan is forced on us
were shattered at this meeting,’ Mountbatten reported to London; ‘all three Sikhs made
it quite clear that they would fight to the last man if put under Muslim domination.’63
On 24 April, Mountbatten had another meeting with Patel. It was to prove one of his
trickiest. ‘Since you have come out here,’ Patel accused him, ‘things have got much
worse. There is a civil war on and you are doing nothing to stop it. You won’t govern
yourself and you won’t let the Central Government govern. You cannot escape
responsibility for this bloodshed.’64 Patel demanded that he turn over full authority to
the government to allow it to ght what he considered to be the insurgents: Muslim
League armies in the Punjab, the North-West Frontier and Assam.
‘Like you and Sta ord, both Dickie and I like Vallabhai [sic] Patel very much indeed’,
wrote Edwina to Isobel Cripps, ‘although we quite realise the dominant attitude he
adopts and his rather dictatorial manner. He and Dickie, however, are getting on very
well indeed and when he behaves like a bit of a gangster, Dickie, as you well [sic]
imagine, does not lag behind!’65 Patel had described one of Mountbatten’s actions in a
written minute as ‘pointless and inappropriate’, sparking a massive argument between
the two men. Mountbatten demanded that he tear the minute up and withdraw it; Patel
refused, and Mountbatten said he would proceed directly to Nehru, resign the
viceroyalty, and y home immediately unless Patel left the government instead. ‘He
questioned whether I would throw up the viceroyalty after only a month in the job,’ he

remembered. ‘I replied that he evidently did not know me. I could be tougher than him
and unless he withdrew his minute then and there I would send for his Prime Minister
and announce my resignation to him.’ To Mountbatten’s immense satisfaction, Patel
gave in.66
By the end of April, Mountbatten’s situation seemed bleak. His relationships with
Gandhi, Jinnah and Patel were all in troublesome states; the princes presented a range
of awkward grievances that he had not yet even begun to address; the Sikhs were
threatening civil war; and violence continued to are up across the country. A malaise
began to spread among the Viceroy’s sta . Alan Campbell-Johnson con ded his
misgivings to the Chief of Sta , Lord Ismay. Ismay was a good deal older than
Campbell-Johnson, and had spent much more time in sticky diplomatic corners. He
shrugged o Campbell-Johnson’s concerns, saying, ‘I like working for lucky men.’ 67
Campbell-Johnson cheered up immediately. Mountbatten was nothing if not lucky.
That luck came to his aid almost immediately. On 28 April, Dickie and Edwina ew to
Peshawar, an ancient Pathan town near the border with Afghanistan in the North-West
Frontier Province. Like many frontiers, the north-west was a wild and tribal place.
Muslim Leaguers wore green; Congress-aligned unionists (also mostly Muslim) wore red.
Friction between the two was common, and often violent. This was the territory of the
Pir of Manki Sharif, a fearsome Islamic fundamentalist nicknamed the ‘Manki Mullah’.
Still only in his mid-twenties, the Manki Mullah excited the interest of the press with his
burning eyes and owing black beard, preached an extreme interpretation of sharia
law, and commanded a following of some 200,000 devotees.68 Only a month before, on
28 March, the Manki Mullah had been captured in the Muslim League o ce in
Peshawar. Since then he had languished in prison, to the enormous bene t of his
reputation; and his Greenshirts, enraged, had been rioting. The Redshirts had rioted
back, and the city had been placed under stringent curfews while the police struggled to
cope.
Fearing the worst, Caroe and Jabbar Khan had persuaded the Redshirts not to
demonstrate during Mountbatten’s visit, and had e ectively cordoned o the centre of
Peshawar. As a result, on the morning of the Viceroy’s arrival, at least 50,000
Greenshirts assembled on the outskirts of the town at Cunningham Park, shouting
political slogans and stamping their feet.69
The scene was too great a temptation for Mountbatten’s brazen self-con dence. He
insisted on driving right to the centre of Cunningham Park, where he seized Edwina’s
hand and climbed gamely to the top of an embankment. The sight of an enormous sea
of coloured turbans and green ags gave the Mountbattens temporary pause. For the
rst time, they were facing a hostile crowd. It was a very large one, and potentially
deadly – Caroe later estimated that there would have been between 20,000 and 40,000
rifles in the crowd, many of which were being jabbed threateningly into the air.70
Edwina quickly came to her senses, and simply smiled and waved. Dickie did likewise
and, to the great surprise of everyone except himself, did not get shot. Instead, the
crowd gave him a ten-minute ovation, and some even chorused a previously
unimaginable phrase: ‘Viceroy zindabad!’ (‘Long live the Viceroy!’).71 In all probability,

the warmth of the reception had little to do with Dickie’s charm, and much more to do
with the fact that he had chosen that day to wear a military uniform of the same Islamic
green hue as the ags, banners and shirts of the Muslim League that uttered in the
breeze for miles across the park.72 His decision may have been sartorial rather than
political, but the e ect was not lessened. Sometimes, Lord Mountbatten’s love of
dressing up paid off.

CHAPTER 11: A BARREL OF GUNPOWDER

reception at Peshawar up to the tribal territories,
WHEN THE MOUNTBATTENS WENT ON FROM THEIR JOYFUL
it was possible to believe that their attempts to woo the Muslims of India were going
well. The day after Peshawar, they ew to the Khyber Pass, that famous corridor
between the dangerous peaks of the Hindu Kush through which Alexander, Timur and
Babur had marched on India, now guarded by Muslim Afridi tribesmen who were
generally reckoned to be among the ablest ghting forces in the world. Seated on ne
carpets in the dappled shade of tamarisk trees, the elders greeted Mountbatten in
Pashtun and invited him to join their loya jirga, or tribal council. They told him that,
when the British left, they wanted control of the Khyber Pass. He replied that it would
be up to the tribes to negotiate with the new authorities, which seemed to satisfy them,
though they did mention that they might prefer to negotiate with Afghanistan than with
a Congress-run India.
The elders proceeded to hold forth against Nehru. Mountbatten avoided responding
and instead told a nice story about his days in the Navy and a brave ship called HMS
Afridi that had fought valiantly in the North Sea. This went down well, and the Afridis
presented him with a ri e. Edwina got a pair of slippers. According to The Times, ‘The
Jirga dispersed in high good humour.’1
Back in Delhi, things did not seem so agreeable after Mountbatten returned to begin
what his political adviser, Sir Conrad Cor eld, referred to as his ‘Dutch auction’ of
British India.2 Mountbatten asked Sir Frederick Burrows, Governor of Bengal, whether
he still felt that he was sitting on a barrel of gunpowder. ‘Good Lord no,’ replied
Burrows, ‘we got o that a long time ago and are now sitting on a complete magazine
which is going to blow up at any time.’3 As if to prove the point, Jinnah made a
statement on 30 April demanding that Pakistan consist of all the Muslim-majority
provinces: Sind, the Punjab, the North-West Frontier Province and Baluchistan in the
west, and Bengal and Assam in the east. Such a Pakistan would certainly have included
Calcutta, for though that city’s population was mainly Hindu it was crucial to the
economy of the surrounding Muslim-majority lands of east Bengal. It could have
included the historically Muslim cultural and business centres of Delhi, Lucknow,
Aligarh, Agra and Cawnpore.4 Anything less, particularly any subpartition of Bengal or
the Punjab, would result in a ‘truncated or mutilated, moth-eaten Pakistan’, Jinnah told
the press.5 Visitors to Jinnah’s elegant Delhi villa had their attention drawn to a silver
map of India he had put up on his mantelpiece, with his claims for Pakistan picked out
in vivid green.6 But Bengal and the Punjab were hotly disputed. Each had large areas of
non-Muslim-majority populations, and, owing to centuries of intermingling, more areas
yet where there was no clear majority at all.

The obvious answer was to divide the provinces up. But partitioning Bengal and the
Punjab was not an option that readily appealed to anyone. Bengal had been split in
two, most contentiously, by the Viceroy Lord Curzon back in 1905, and that had gone so
badly that the King had revoked it at the Delhi Durbar in 1911. When Mountbatten
raised the possibility of partitioning the provinces with Jinnah, the latter blanched, and
argued that those provinces had strong internal identities: that Hindus identi ed
themselves more strongly as Bengalis or Punjabis than as Hindus or Congress
supporters, and that the integrity of their provinces ought be preserved above all. But
Mountbatten pointed out that such arguments would also apply to India as a whole, and
if they were accepted there could be no Pakistan. ‘I am afraid I drove the old gentleman
quite mad,’ reported Mountbatten jovially, ‘because whichever way his argument went I
always pursued it to a stage beyond which he did not wish it to go.’7
While her husband returned to Delhi, Lady Mountbatten extended her tour for two
days. At the suggestion of Vallabhbhai Patel, she had decided to travel around the
hostile region on her own.8 On 30 April she was in Rawalpindi, and from there she
visited the Wah Relief Camp for victims of recent rioting. Photographs in the press
showed her crouching down to talk face to face with refugee women, establishing an
informality that was a departure from the style of previous vicereines.9 Even to Edwina,
who had served in London during the war, the scene at Wah was shocking – ‘like the
Blitz at its worst’, she wrote.10 The wards were lled with dust and bereft of drinking
water. Very few of the beds had sheets. Visitors and children were allowed in and out of
the infectious diseases wards freely: as a result, measles had spread everywhere,
including the maternity ward, and both dysentery and pneumonia were rife. Most
upsetting of all, though, were the injuries which had been in icted by human hands.
People had been carried in from the villages with horri c burns. ‘They seem to be very
fond of tying whole families together, pouring oil on them and then lighting them as a
single torch,’ Lord Mountbatten remarked.11 Among the survivors were young children
whose hands had been hacked off.12
From Wah, Edwina ew to the towns of Dera Ismael Khan and Tank, where she spent
ve hours walking in the burning heat among heaps of rubble left by communal riots.
She asked people directly what they needed, and when the answer came – clothing – she
took the matter to local o cials, and was able to promise that some would be provided
within a few days. The next day, she ew to Amritsar to visit more areas devastated by
rioting. In the afternoon, Jawahar’s cousin, Rameshwari Nehru, showed her around
similar locations in Lahore.13 On 2 May she was supposed to y to Multan for more of
the same, but a dust storm prevented the aircraft from landing. With the greatest
di culty, her aides persuaded her that she would have to return to Delhi. 14 She had
nonetheless visited nine hospitals, seven refugee centres, and four riot areas. She had
been seen to speak to Hindu, Sikh and Muslim victims alike.
This first tour made a great impact on Edwina herself as well as on the Indian public –
and on Jawaharlal Nehru who, as a result of her e orts, began to view her with an
‘undying admiration’, according to his friend Marie Seton.15 After it, she made a serious
e ort to involve herself in improving the public health situation. She corresponded with

high o cials who, by etiquette if not by inclination, were unable to ignore her, and
forwarded notes to Dickie with advice for the setting up of health clinics in refugee
camps. It was obvious from the tone of her letters that she was not content to observe
events, but meant to direct them. She questioned the government’s policy on refugees,
and recommended a range of practical interventions. She suggested setting up a fulltime clinic in each refugee centre. Within two weeks, it was done.16
Having been prevented from visiting Multan on the rst trip, Edwina returned a
fortnight later. She visited a camp of 2000 refugees in the middle of the city, and met
separate delegations of Hindu and Muslim women to assure them that her husband was
doing everything he could to help them. Whether he was or not, Lady Mountbatten’s
attention was fully engaged. During the visit, she noticed that the civil hospital needed
lamps for its operating theatre. On her return to Delhi, she wrote to the brigadier in
charge of the medical directorate in New Delhi and, after a struggle, obtained one.17
The deprivation Edwina saw on her tours, and its contrast with her cosseted life in
Delhi, shamed her deeply. Previous vicereines had done their share of opening hospitals
and presenting cups to schoolchildren; but any small discomfort could be assuaged by
the many and fabulous luxuries of the Viceroy’s House. ‘Lady Mountbatten remarked to
me that she always suspected, and now knew, just how easy it is to get engulfed in this
labyrinthine palace and live self-contained and cut o from the outside world,’ Alan
Campbell-Johnson had recorded after only two days in India.18 Yet Edwina was
unwilling to abandon her charity at the forbidding iron gates. Delhi was on strict food
rationing by the spring of 1947, but those in o cial circles had rarely felt the gnaw of
hunger until she arrived.19 So strict were her prescriptions that many of the officials who
dwelt in the house attempted to secure luncheon and dinner invitations elsewhere every
day.
Edwina also insisted on rewording the court circular so that she and the Viceroy
‘received’ every guest; formerly, they had ‘received’ top dignitaries, ‘seen’ middling
ones, and ‘interviewed’ the minor sort. People were no longer ‘honoured’ with the
viceregal invitation or presence, but simply ‘invited’, their parties ‘attended’. ‘In the
changed circumstances in India when dealing so largely with Indians this means a very
great deal,’ Edwina wrote to Lady Reading, ‘and I have been amazed at the number of
very favourable comments which have been made on this decision. After all, it is surely
example and behaviour which keeps up the prestige of the Crown and one’s country –
not mere words.’20 Under Edwina’s new rules, at least half of the guests at any of their
frequent entertainments were Indian. ‘It makes me absolutely sick to see this house full
of dirty Indians,’ remarked one English lady to another within earshot of the
Mountbattens’ daughter, Pamela. The Viceroy was so horri ed that he asked the
provincial governors to send anyone expressing such sentiments back to Britain.21
May began, and with it came the rst crippling outbreak of the inevitable ‘Delhi
belly’, which felled both Mountbatten and Ismay. It did nothing for the Viceroy’s mood.
As he admitted to Edwina, it had become depressingly apparent to him that there was
no chance of transferring power to a united India.22 ‘The more I look at the problem in
India the more I realise that all this partition business is sheer madness and is going to

reduce the economic e ciency of the whole country immeasurably,’ he reported to
London. ‘No-one would ever induce me to agree to it were it not for this fantastic
communal madness that has seized everybody and leaves no other course open.’ He was
beginning to suspect that both sides were deliberately avoiding a settlement. ‘The most
we can hope to do, as I have said before, is to put the responsibility for any of these
mad decisions fairly and squarely on the Indian shoulders in the eyes of the world, for
one day they will bitterly regret the decision they are about to make.’23
On 2 May, he sent his draft plan back to London for the government’s consideration.
Two days later, the Hindustan Times, a newspaper edited by Gandhi’s son Devadas and
owned by his patron, G.D. Birla, launched the rst Congress attack on Mountbatten.
‘For the rst time since Mountbatten assumed the Viceroyalty the feeling that he may
not be playing fair has come among the Congressmen and Sikh leaders’, it read.24
Gandhi told Mountbatten that, since signing the joint declaration, Jinnah would no
longer be able to resort to violence and would have to accept whatever plan was put
before him. Mountbatten had had time to come up with a response to this familiar ruse.
‘I told him Jinnah signed in good faith when he thought I was going to give a fair
decision and that I did not for one moment suppose the Muslims would not immediately
go to war if I attempted to betray them in this manner,’ he remembered.25 But Gandhi
was not persuaded. ‘The communal feuds you see here are, in my opinion, partly due to
the presence of the British,’ he told a Reuters correspondent. ‘If the British were not
here, we would still go through the fire no doubt, but that fire would purify us.’26
‘He knows quite well that the things he may suggest are di cult,’ explained one of
Gandhi’s followers, Agatha Harrison, to Edwina. ‘My long and close touch with this man
convinces me that only sustained contact will yield any result … I have seen Mr Gandhi
used spasmodically, and then – because people nd him ba ing – they give up and feel
what he suggests for action is impossible.’27 The Viceroy was beginning to feel very
much ba ed, and increasingly disposed to give up. It was left to Edwina to charm the
Mahatma, which she did; and he charmed her back. His ‘dear sister’, as he called her,
would claim for the rest of her life that Gandhi was the most wonderful man she had
ever met. From this point on, cordial relations between the Viceroy’s House and Gandhi
were almost exclusively maintained by Edwina, who regularly visited Gandhi’s hut in
the insalubrious Bhangi Colony, home to many of Delhi’s Untouchables. Dickie never
went.
Mountbatten deliberately allowed a meeting with Gandhi to run late on 2 May, for he
had an eye on his next interviewee: Mohammad Ali Jinnah. He was convinced that
progress might be made if these two estranged leaders could be induced to speak. ‘I
managed to be a bit unpunctual,’ he remembered, ‘and their interviews overlapped.’
The seating in the Viceroy’s study consisted of large, imposing leather armchairs, too
heavy to move. Gandhi and Jinnah each settled into one as far away from the other
man as possible. They proceeded to speak in hushed mutters, with Mountbatten trotting
back and forth as an interlocutor. If either had hoped to avoid speaking directly to his
rival, he would not escape so easily. Mountbatten took advantage of the quiet to put it
to them that they should meet again at Jinnah’s house. There was no excuse not to

agree, and so they did.28 That evening, Gandhi came close to endorsing Mountbatten
publicly at his prayer meeting. ‘We have no right to question the Viceroy’s honesty until
he betrays our trust,’ Gandhi concluded. It was ‘until’, rather than ‘unless’, but still close
enough to encouragement to yield press enthusiasm the next day.29 The public gap
between Mahatma and Mountbatten had been closed. Edwina’s friendship with Gandhi
would ensure that it stayed closed forever after.
As they had agreed, Gandhi and Jinnah met on 6 May. The meeting went on for three
hours, and achieved nothing much. It was established, again, that the two disagreed
over partition, and agreed that violence should cease. It would soon be established
again, too, that neither man’s call for such a cessation would be heard.
That same day, the Mountbattens made the long journey up to the hill station of Simla,
7200 feet up in the Himalayan foothills. The British had adopted Simla in 1832, when
the Governor General started coming every summer for its fresh Alpine climate, days
away from the heat, humidity and lth of Calcutta. It became the o cial summer
capital of India. Here, among thick forests of deodar trees, meadows blossoming with
wild owers and spectacular views to the snow-capped high Himalayas, the British built
a fantastical vision of home. Soon the crags were dotted with precariously situated
Scottish baronial castles and half-timbered Tudor cottages. ‘It looks like a place of which
a child might dream after seeing a pantornirne’, wrote the Viceroy, Lord Du erin, in
1885. ‘That the capital of the Indian empire should thus be hanging on by its eyelids to
the side of a hill is too absurd.’ He was smitten.30
The British continued to come to Simla, sometimes for eight months of each year, with
the European ladies and gentlemen carried up in the local jhampan sedan chairs. They
were followed by hundreds of coolies, who had been press-ganged from their
surrounding farms into the service of Her Majesty’s Government, lugging dispatchboxes, carefully packed crockery, musical instruments, trunks full of theatrical costumes
for amateur dramatics at the Gaiety Theatre, crates of tea and dried provisions, faithful
spaniels in travelling-boxes, rolled-up rugs, aspidistras, card tables, favourite armchairs,
baskets of linen, and tons upon tons of les; all the paraphernalia of the raj literally
borne on the shoulders of one long caravan of miserable, sweating Indian peasants.
Eventually, in 1891, a narrow-gauge railway was opened, weaving in and out of 103
tunnels up from the plains at Kalka – a journey which still took at least six hours. The
British never questioned whether all this was worth it. Gandhi may have criticized the
administration’s annual repair to Simla for being ‘government working from the 500th
floor’, but that was exactly the point.31
Mountbatten had originally planned to invite Gandhi, Jinnah, Nehru, Liaquat, Patel
and the Nawab of Bhopal to Simla for an informal weekend.32 After it became apparent
that the Sikhs were a pressing concern, and the Mahatma started to get on
Mountbatten’s nerves, the list changed to exclude Gandhi and include Baldev Singh.33 It
was eventually decided that Simla had ‘unfortunate associations’ – Lord Wavell’s
attempt to stage a conference there had ended in disappointment.34 But the plan did not

expire. When Krishna Menon suggested that Dickie take Nehru away for a couple of
days to Kashmir, Mountbatten approved of the idea, though not the location. He
thought, rightly, that such a trip would cause problems with the Maharaja of Kashmir,
who had welcomed Nehru the year before by arresting him as soon as he set foot in the
state. To Menon’s disappointment, he settled on Simla again.35
Nehru had endured a viceroy’s hospitality in Simla before. Two years previously,
shortly after being released from a long imprisonment, he had stayed at a governmentowned house called Armsdell. ‘Red-liveried chaprasis are in evidence, and both the soap
and the notepaper are embossed “Viceregal Lodge”!’ he had written to his daughter,
Indira. ‘I nd it quite impossible to use this Viceregal notepaper, though I have
succumbed to the soap. Rather odd this atmosphere for me. I do not feel too happy
about it.’36 The contrast two years later was profound. Jawahar joined Dickie and
Edwina for a cosy house-party in the morose splendour of the Viceroy’s Lodge, perched
atop the high peak at the far end of Simla’s razorback ridge. ‘House hideous’, wrote
Edwina with characteristic brevity. ‘Bogus English Baronial, Hollywood’s idea of
Viceregal Lodge.’37
Initially, Nehru was tense. He did not enjoy bogus baronial, nor the sight of jhampan
coolies, nding the idea of a poor man carrying a rich one distasteful. Yet soon he
relaxed when the Mountbattens took him for tea at the Viceroy’s Retreat. This charming,
secluded cottage, hidden among dense forests near the village of Mashobra, was about
half an hour’s drive from Simla along precipitous roads. It was set among some of the
most captivating scenery in the whole of India. Lush gorges plunged dramatically down
thousands of feet to glittering sapphire tributaries of the mighty Sutlej River, and
colossal mountains rose up thousands of feet behind them. Wild cacti and delicate
orchids sprouted forth from the roots of conifers; families of monkeys swung through the
pines and picked keenly at strawberry bushes; above the treetops, eagles circled.
Jawahar walked with Dickie and Edwina around the orchard terraces and up
mountain paths, which wound up the hill from which Lord Kitchener’s former mansion,
Wild ower Hall, could be glimpsed atop the next peak. 38 Though once a amboyant
youth, Nehru had become a man of simpler tastes. Yet there were two pleasures he could
never resist: the vitality of mountain scenery, and the company of an interesting
woman. At Mashobra, he had both. Soon he was happily teaching Dickie and Edwina to
walk backwards up slopes to rest their muscles; the Mountbattens, too, ‘fell in love with
the place,’ noted Campbell-Johnson, ‘and are quite determined to come back again.’39
There was plenty of hard work to be done, but the atmosphere remained convivial.
Nehru had brought his daughter, Indira, and the Mountbattens one of theirs, Pamela.
Pamela opened a door and found the acting Prime Minister standing on his head, a
daily yoga ritual. She was taken aback when he cheerfully carried on a conversation
from that position.40 Even the steady stream of depressing telegrams from 500 oors
below could not dampen the mood. News of an Indian Mutiny Day in Bengal, and
threats of an accompanying ‘holocaust’, came to nothing. For once, that province was
quiet, even after Gandhi used a prayer meeting in Calcutta to blame Muslims for its
partition.41 There were riots in Amritsar and Hyderabad, but these places were far

away, and seemed like another world entirely. Nehru was at his most cooperative,
expressing the hope that Mountbatten might stay on after the transfer of power as
Governor General of both India and Pakistan. When it came to the drawing of the new
borders, he agreed with Mountbatten that the British ought to take no responsibility.
‘The less H.M.G. did in this direction the better for all concerned,’ Nehru was reported as
saying. He was equally amenable to another pressing aspect of Mountbatten’s personal
concerns. ‘Pandit Nehru stressed that the psychological e ect of power being transferred
earlier than 1948 would be an invaluable factor in the long-term view of Indo-British
relationship.’42
After two days, Mountbatten received the exciting news he had been awaiting. Back
in London, the cabinet had authorized his plan for the transfer of power. Only six weeks
into his viceroyalty, it seemed that he had already solved the insoluble problem.
Immediately he issued a statement saying that he was ready to present the Indian
leaders with the plan, and invited Nehru, Jinnah, Patel, Liaquat and Baldev Singh to
attend a meeting at the Viceroy’s House in Delhi on 17 May at 10.30 a.m.43
So well had things been going with Jawahar that, on a whim, Dickie broke protocol
and ignored the advice of his sta to show his new chum a copy of the secret plan in the
study after dinner that very night. But when Jawahar read through the top secret papers
his disposition turned from a able to shocked, and from shocked to furious. At two
o’clock the next morning he stormed into Krishna Menon’s bedroom. The draft
proposals, he wrote to Dickie that night, ‘produced a devastating e ect upon me.’ They
presented, he said, ‘a picture of fragmentation and con ict and disorder, and, unhappily
also, of a worsening of relations between India and Britain.’44
The plan from which Nehru recoiled was known as ‘Plan Balkan’, a name hardly more
inspiring than ‘Operation Madhouse’, and indeed approximately synonymous.45 Having
for centuries enforced rule by unelected men from London, the British government had
recently developed an unprecedented enthusiasm for the will of the people – preferably,
for the will of as many people as possible. There would be an India, there would be a
Pakistan, and each province could choose which one to join. But the principle of selfdetermination would be extended further yet. Should Bengal or the Punjab be divided in
their wishes, each state could be split; or it could choose to become an independent
nation. Should the troublesome North-West Frontier Province wish to become
independent, it could do so too. As for the 565 princely states, each of those could also
determine its own future in or out of the two dominions, ‘presumably as feudatories or
allies of Britain’, Nehru commented sharply.46 What Nehru had foreseen was the
prospect of Balkanization, but on the colossal scale of the subcontinent: the proliferation
of dozens, perhaps even hundreds, of small and potentially antagonistic nation-states.
Too small to survive alone, these would inevitably end up serving the interests of
peripheral giants: not just Britain, but the United States, Russia, China, and
Afghanistan. It would stir up civil conflict, undermine the central authority, and split the
army, police and services.47
Jawahar was ‘white with rage’, Dickie remembered. ‘You know, he used to get these
tantrums, having been in prison. He took a long while to control himself.’48 Dickie was

upset, but quickly realized that the situation might have been worse yet. Had his plan
been rejected publicly a week later by Nehru, he told his sta , ‘Dickie Mountbatten
would have been nished and could have packed his bag. We would have looked
complete fools with the Government at home, having led them up the garden to believe
that Nehru would accept the Plan.’49 He immediately cancelled the announcement he
had been due to make that morning, and delayed the meeting with the leaders from 17
May to 2 June – prompting the press to report incorrectly that this was either because of
the British parliamentary recess, or because Gandhi had rejected Pakistan. High up in
the Himalayan foothills, Mountbatten, Nehru, the Reforms Commissioner V.P. Menon,
and the Governor of the Punjab, Evan Jenkins, attempted to smooth the plan into an
acceptable shape. Suddenly, even the helpful psychological e ect of an early transfer of
power had dissipated: ‘The Viceroy said that Pandit Nehru had also stressed to him that
the present proposed timetable was too much of a rush.’50 In just three hours, Menon
and Nehru drew up a new plan, with the consent but not the direct involvement of
Mountbatten. Telephone calls were made to Congress potentates, and it was con rmed
that the revised plan would be accepted.51 Neither the Muslim League, the princes, nor
any other body in India would be given the chance to review the plan before its
announcement.52
On 14 May, Mountbatten descended from Simla in his open-top Buick, describing
himself as ‘feeling fighting fit’. As for his relations with Nehru, they had apparently been
improved, rather than damaged, by the trouble in the hills. ‘We have made real friends
with him and whatever else happens I feel this friendship is sincere and will last.’53
Mountbatten’s optimism was not shared by leaders back in London, who felt they had
indeed been ‘led up the garden’ and were seriously considering having the Viceroy
supplanted. Patience with faraway India was at a low ebb, for the domestic situation
was in turmoil. On 8 May, the Chancellor had announced that Britain would freeze
further payments on all its war debts until the creditors agreed to reductions. The
exchequer was more than £3 billion in the red, thanks to the war: it owed Egypt £450
million, Ireland £250 million, Australia and New Zealand £200 million each, and further
enormous sums to Argentina, Norway and Brazil. But the largest creditor of all, with
£1250 million owed, was India.
Attlee drafted, but did not send, a stern telegram to Mountbatten on 13 May. He
pointed out that the cabinet had been under the impression that Nehru would de nitely
accept Mountbatten’s plan, and that consequently they had made no substantial
alterations to it. Any mistakes in it were Mountbatten’s, not theirs.54 The following day,
Attlee’s private secretary wrote him a note about ‘the plan … for a Minister to go out to
India to settle matters there with full powers and the minimum of reference home’. The
secretary strongly recommended that Attlee himself went to Delhi: ‘This gesture would, I
feel, re the imagination of the world.’55 But Attlee recoiled from such a prospect, and
no other minister could be found: they were all too ill, too busy or too inexperienced. In
the end, Mountbatten was summoned back to London to explain himself.
It was a reprimand, and Mountbatten took it very badly. Without hesitation, he
threatened to resign. Edwina, together with V.P. Menon, calmed him down.56 It was

Edwina, too, Menon’s daughter remembered, who extracted a concession from Nehru to
o set the revisions to the plan. She persuaded him that India should accept an initial
phase of dominion status.57 This was no mean feat. Dominion status had been seen as
an unacceptable halfway house by Congress since its declaration of ‘purna swaraj’
(complete self-rule) in 1930, and by Nehru, who had been behind that declaration, for
longer still. It is a clear demonstration of Edwina’s extraordinary intimacy with
Jawaharlal Nehru and her in uence over policy. Menon’s daughter was not the only one
to express such a view. ‘I have often wondered how Jawaharlal was won over by Lord
Mountbatten’, wrote Nehru’s close friend Abul Kalam Azad, the highest-ranking Muslim
in Congress. ‘Jawaharlal is a man of principle, but he is also impulsive and amenable to
personal in uence … perhaps even greater was the in uence of Lady Mountbatten.’ 58
Where several viceroys and Sir Sta ord Cripps had failed, Edwina Mountbatten
succeeded – saving her husband’s political career as well as the entire process of the
transfer of power.
It was announced that Mountbatten would be returning to London for an unscheduled
visit, the press apparently swallowing the cover story that the government had decided
it must have ‘ nal discussions’ with him ‘in view of the importance of these
arrangements’.59 On 18 May, the Mountbattens and V.P. Menon left for London by air.
They emerged drawn and unsmiling at Northolt Airfield the following afternoon. ‘He has
met the Indian leaders and heard their views, but res still rage in Lahore, and disorders
are at their height in the Punjab!’ exclaimed the Pathé News announcer, as if pitching a
new adventure comic. ‘Only twelve months now remain in which to complete the
transfer of power to the Indians!’60
Mountbatten met with the opposition, in the forms of Churchill, Anthony Eden, John
Anderson and Lord Salisbury, and reassured them o the record that it might be worth
their while to take up Nehru’s concession. If they were prepared to o er India a very
early transfer of power, they could expect it to accept dominion status rather than full
independence.61 The next day, Churchill wrote to Attlee that ‘if those terms are made
good, so that there is an e ective acceptance of dominion status for the several parts of
a divided India, the Conservative Party will agree to facilitate the passage of this session
of the legislation necessary to confer dominion status upon such several parts of
India.’62 There was no ambiguity in his words. It was the phase of dominion status, as
secured by Edwina, that persuaded him to support the bill.
Mountbatten himself was deeply passionate about the idea of the Commonwealth,
and retaining the Indian territories within it was a preoccupation of his and the
opposition’s, not the government’s. ‘It is the de nite objective of His Majesty’s
Government to obtain a unitary Government for British India and the Indian States, if
possible within the British Commonwealth’, Attlee had written in his commission to
Mountbatten back in February.63 That last clause had been added at the speci c request
of Dickie himself.64 Mountbatten supported it out of a sense that international
brotherhood was a splendid thing for world peace and understanding. The opposition’s
reason was not dissimilar, though with a heavier emphasis on its advantages for Britain.
As Leopold Amery wrote to Churchill shortly afterwards, ‘we can only hope that,

somehow or other, the Britannic orbit will remain a reality in this parlous world even if,
to assume the worst, Indian politicians are unwise enough to wish to break the formal
link.’65 On the government side, the new India Secretary Lord Listowel, who had
replaced Pethick-Lawrence just weeks before, was in strong accord with the
Conservative view.
Mountbatten saw Churchill again on 22 May, nding him still in his bed – a sight
well-known to the old man’s colleagues. Churchill habitually organized breakfast
meetings over a cigar and a weak whisky and soda, often attended by his malodorous
poodle, Rufus, and his budgerigar, Toby, the latter perching on a square sponge atop the
Churchillian pate.66 On this occasion, Mountbatten remembered that Churchill was
‘extremely pleasant’ to him. ‘Winston Churchill said he wished to congratulate the
Government on their perspicacity in appointing someone of my intelligence,’ he told
historians Larry Collins and Dominique Lapierre in the 1970s. ‘I do want that quoted.’ In
a letter written to Attlee immediately after the meeting in question Churchill implied
that, in fact, his feelings about Mountbatten were rather more ambivalent, and that he
would like his Conservative colleagues to be allowed to question him further in secret.67
It is no easy feat to maintain one’s focus while being scolded by a man with a
budgerigar on his head, and perhaps Mountbatten’s confusion is attributable to such a
distraction. Certainly Mountbatten seemed ‘very anxious’ about the old man’s attitude
when he spoke to Amery later that week. ‘Dominion status has done something to ease
the position with Winston, but he still fears some explosion’, Amery noted.68 All
accounts agree that Churchill gave Mountbatten a message to deliver to Jinnah. ‘This is
a matter of life and death for Pakistan, if you do not accept this o er with both hands,’
the Conservative leader advised the Muslim. Mountbatten emphasized to his sta that
Churchill’s opinion was the only one in the world likely to sway Jinnah.69
The signs of cooperation from the Muslim League were mixed. Jinnah used
Mountbatten’s absence to voice a demand for a 1000-mile corridor through the Indian
Union to connect East and West Pakistan – something which the British had already
dismissed, and Nehru immediately denounced as ‘completely unrealistic’.70 On the other
hand, the Jinnah made an uncharacteristically generous announcement about the
Viceroy. ‘Lord Mountbatten’s e orts will secure full justice to the 100 millions of
Mussalmans,’ he wrote. ‘I am not in the habit of attering anyone, but I must say that
throughout our discussions and examination of the various points, I was impressed by
the high sense of integrity, fairplay and impartiality on his part and, therefore, I feel
that Lord Mountbatten will succeed in his great mission.’71
Beyond the main parties, signs continued that the communal interests were gearing
up to welcome Mountbatten back. A Hindu fundamentalist party, the All-India Dharma
Sangh, issued a summons to its followers. Hindu holy men began to pour into New
Delhi, opposing partition, cow slaughter, and the ban on Untouchability which the
constituent assembly had passed on 29 April. At the same time, fundamentalist Muslims
poured in from the United Provinces and the Punjab. Bands of Khaksars, a militant
group known as the ‘Servants of the Dust’, were seen to be gathering in the city and
wearing fascist-style uniforms; large numbers were arrested, and had their weapons

confiscated, but still more came.72
The Mountbattens left Northolt air eld on the morning of 29 May. Two days later
they were in Delhi, Dickie clutching the new version of his plan, as approved by the
British cabinet; Edwina bearing placatory gifts for Fatima Jinnah.73 The plan had been
sold to the British government. Now, it had to be sold to the Indians.

CHAPTER 12: LIGHTNING SPEED IS MUCH TOO SLOW

; Mountbatten returned to Delhi, chastened but still
THE PLAN HAD BEEN APPROVED; THE ACTS DRAFTED
hopeful. ‘We are just starting our fateful week with the temperature already over 112
and the whole scene very explosive but we hope for the best’, wrote Edwina on 2 June.1
‘I nd myself all alone,’ said Gandhi. ‘Even the Sardar [Patel] and Jawaharlal think my
reading of the situation is wrong and peace is sure to return if partition is agreed
upon … the future of independence gained at this price is going to be dark.’2
That morning, the future leaders of India and Pakistan were summoned to the
Viceroy’s study for a two-hour brie ng on the new plan. Sitting around the table with
him were Nehru, Vallabhbhai Patel and J.B. Kripalani for Congress, Jinnah, Liaquat and
Abdur Rab Nishtar for the League, and Baldev Singh for the Sikhs. ‘I got the feeling that
the less the leaders talked, the less the chance of friction and perhaps the ultimate
breakdown of the meeting,’ noted Mountbatten, and consequently libustered for as
long as possible. His ploy was to declare upfront that he was not asking for the leaders’
agreement to the plan – for he knew that it met no one’s demands. If they accepted that
the plan was a solution in the interests of the country, that would be enough. He asked
the leaders to let him have their responses by midnight. Jinnah told Mountbatten he
would return at eleven o’clock after consulting his committee and, sending the others o
to read their copies of the plan, Mountbatten held him back ‘to impress on him that
there could not be any question of a “No” from the League.’ After he left the room, Alan
Campbell-Johnson picked up a scrap of paper that the Quaid-e-Azam had left behind
him, covered in scribbles from the meeting. The words ‘Governor General’ were written
in inverted commas and underlined in the middle of the page; around it was a collection
of symbols. ‘I am no psychologist,’ admitted Campbell-Johnson, ‘but I think I can detect
the symbols of power and glory here.’ In contemplating his success, Jinnah had drawn a
collection of phallic shapes, all pointing proudly upwards.3
One troublesome icon having been dealt with, another showed up. Gandhi had spent
the previous week railing against the new plan, and trying to revert to the Cabinet
Mission plan of 1946 – which he had been instrumental in refusing. The Congress
Working Committee was thoroughly annoyed with him, and Mountbatten too had had
his ll of the Mahatma. ‘He may be a saint but he seems also to be a disciple of Trotsky’,
the Viceroy wrote to London. ‘Judge then of my astonished delight on nding him enter
the room with his nger to his lips to indicate that it was his day of silence!’
Mountbatten spent forty- ve minutes explaining why the Cabinet Mission plan could
not be enforced if any party was opposed to it, with Gandhi scribbling replies on the
backs of old envelopes.4
At midnight, Jinnah returned to the Viceroy’s House, ready to hurl another spanner

into Mountbatten’s fragile works. As the constitutional leader of the Muslim League, he
said, it was not in his power to accept the plan tomorrow. However, he would do his
best to ensure the council of the League would accept it, and would bring it up at their
next meeting – in a week’s time.
This was exactly the sort of manoeuvre guaranteed to make Congress back out, and
Mountbatten knew it. He told Jinnah that he had only secured Congress acceptance on
the basis that the Muslim League would accept simultaneously, but Jinnah would not
budge. ‘If that is your attitude,’ Mountbatten told him, ‘then the leaders of the Congress
Party and the Sikhs will refuse nal acceptance at the meeting in the morning; chaos
will follow, and you will lose your Pakistan, probably for good.’
Jinnah shrugged. ‘What must be, must be.’
‘Mr Jinnah!’ exclaimed Mountbatten. ‘I do not intend to let you wreck all the work
that has gone into this settlement. Since you will not accept for the Moslem League, I
will speak for them myself.’ He told Jinnah that, in the meeting, he would announce
that he was satisfied with Jinnah’s assurances, a hair-splitting legalistic move that would
hopefully fool Congress into thinking Jinnah had accepted: ‘and if your Council fails to
ratify the agreement, you can place the blame on me.’ When he mentioned Jinnah’s
assurances, he would look at Jinnah – and Jinnah should nod his head in agreement.
Mountbatten looked at Jinnah then. Silently, the Quaid-e-Azam nodded his head.5
The next morning, the leaders of all parties arrived back at the Viceroy’s House, tired
and acquiescent. Mountbatten was prepared to listen to their many reservations in
private, but decided that none should be allowed to speak at the meeting in case they
upset each other. And so, for the rst time in history, no party raised an objection
against a plan for independence. Immediately after they had not objected, Mountbatten
theatrically raised and then thumped on to the table a plan for the transfer of power. In
the rst paragraph, this revealed the unexpected fact that power was to be transferred
by 15 August 1947 – ten months in advance of the June 1948 deadline, and just ten
weeks from the 3 June meeting itself.6 The room’s silence changed its quality from one
of studied etiquette to one of shock. The Viceroy dismissed the bewildered leaders into
the searing brightness of a Delhi day, and could re ect on his personal moment of glory.
Both parties had been forced to compromise – Congress accepting partition, Jinnah
more or less accepting what would probably be a moth-eaten Pakistan – but he,
Mountbatten, had finally been able to set a date.7
Mountbatten left the leaders as little thinking time as possible between their
acceptance of the plan and their distinctly un-triumphant addresses to the nation on AllIndia Radio that afternoon. ‘It is with no joy in my heart that I commend these
proposals, though I have no doubt in my mind that this is the right course,’ said Nehru,
sadly. Jinnah, too, noted that ‘We cannot say or feel that we are satis ed,’ and nished
on the slogan ‘Pakistan zindabad’ (‘Long live Pakistan’), apparently misheard by some
listeners as a exultant crow of ‘Pakistan’s in the bag!’8 Mountbatten declared again that
he would have preferred to preserve the unity of India. ‘But there can be no question of
coercing any large areas in which one community has a majority, to live against their
will under a Government in which another community has a majority. And the only

alternative to coercion is partition.’9
In London, the terms of the plan were announced in the House of Commons at half
past three that afternoon. Leo Amery had promised Mountbatten he would write a letter
t o The Times ‘to steady Conservative opinion here, in case Winston proved fractious’,
but even Winston was in a placatory mood.10 ‘I am sure that Dickie has done
marvellously,’ noted Harold Nicolson, who was present. ‘But it is curious that we should
regard as a hero the man who liquidates the Empire which other heroes such as Clive,
Warren Hastings and Napier won for us. Very odd indeed.’11 So it may have seemed, but
Mountbatten was serving his country with as much loyalty, courage and determination
as had those other heroes. Mountbatten turned a stagnating mess into perhaps the most
successful retreat from empire in history – from the point of view of the imperialist
nation, at least. If his conduct has provoked censure as well as acclaim, then perhaps
that is the price any hero must pay; Clive, Hastings and Napier have.
The following day, 4 June, Mountbatten gave a bravura performance of the charisma
that had allowed him to pull o this feat. At the press conference he had called to
announce the plan, he was warm, witty and spectacular, disclosing the startling
closeness of independence in answer to a question like a stage magician pulling a rabbit
from a hat. Mountbatten had chosen 15 August ‘out of the blue’, he admitted – it was the
second anniversary of VJ Day, but nothing more significant than that.12
Just before the Mountbattens had left England in March, Edwina had answered a
relative’s concerns briskly. ‘Don’t worry,’ she had said. ‘This is going to be a marvellous
experience – and Dickie says we’ll be back as soon as we can – and that means not
long.’13 By the end of May, Mountbatten had browbeaten the government into making
it even less long than it might have been. Attlee had given Mountbatten an exit-date of
1 June 1948. This was a tight schedule in any case, bearing in mind the complexity of
Indian politics and the possible repercussions of the process. And yet, undaunted by the
task before him, the last Viceroy took the bizarre and unilateral decision to speed
independence up.
‘When I got out to India I realized … that, although we in London had visualized the
programme of transfer for June, 1948, to be moving at lightning speed, in India it was
regarded as being much too slow,’ Mountbatten would tell a meeting of the East India
Association in London the following year. ‘Everybody there was agreed on this point:
the leaders, leading British o cials, my sta advisers.’ 14 This was manifestly untrue.
After seeing the plan at Simla, even Nehru had told him he was going too fast.15 Another
Congress politician told him that the timetable would only have been workable if the
British had announced a ve-year date for their departure two or three years
previously.16 For the Muslim League, Liaquat stated that he did not believe under any
circumstances, united or divided, India could stand on its own legs by June 1948.17
Several of the princes had begged the British to stay. As for the British o cials and
Mountbatten’s sta advisers, the archives show them to have been explicitly opposed to
haste.18 V.P. Menon had advised Mountbatten that ‘The psychological e ect of power
having been transferred earlier than 1948 will be an invaluable factor in the long-term
view of Indo-British relationship.’19 But Menon made it clear that this would hold true

only if there was a complete transfer of power to the whole of India of dominion status,
followed by ‘not less than four or five years’ during which the parts of the country would
draw up their constitutions. He envisaged a joint defence policy and a joint Governor
General of India and Pakistan in this eventuality, which is very di erent from what
actually happened. In fact, the only person who seemed to agree unreservedly with
Mountbatten that power had to be handed over so far ahead of time was his public
relations adviser, Alan Campbell-Johnson.
‘A terri c sense of urgency had been pressed upon him by everybody to whom he had
spoken’, Campbell-Johnson wrote.20 But the records do not show anyone else pressing
Mountbatten to hurry up: not the British government, not his advisers, not the Sikhs, not
the Muslim League, not Gandhi, and not even the majority of Congress. Nehru and Patel
may have hinted that they were keen to get on with governing, but neither expressed
any demand that Mountbatten set a date in August that same year. The rush was
Mountbatten’s, and his alone.
A few months before the Mountbattens went to India, their marriage was in one of its
healthier phases. Photographs of the time show them smiling, a ectionate and relaxed,
and their letters reveal a matching picture. A few weeks afterwards, they reached a
nadir, and by the beginning of June were constantly ghting. It is hard to believe that
this turbulence did not have an e ect on Mountbatten professionally – especially as he
had to work closely with Nehru and Gandhi, two men whose company his wife plainly
preferred to his own. Edwina had not wanted to be in India in the rst place, and in the
rst few weeks put pressure on her husband to ensure that they would be on their way
back to Britain as soon as possible.21 Dickie had always striven to impress her with his
achievements at work. Perhaps, if he could carry out the transfer of power swiftly and
efficiently enough, he might still save his marriage.22
Within days of the announcement that there would be two successor administrations in
India, talk had turned to which of them would be Britain’s favourite.23 The smart money
was on Pakistan. Muslim organizations in general, and particularly the League, had
spent many years cultivating links with Britain. Pakistan was likely to be the weaker of
the two states, and would be seeking out foreign alliances more hungrily than would
India. Moreover, its western part was geographically advantageous. West Pakistan
would border Persia, Afghanistan and China, three nations of strategic interest to
Britain and the United States. It was close enough to Russia to be even more interesting
on that count.
Gandhi raised the question of favouritism with Mountbatten in early June, requesting
that the British announce there would be no di erentiation between the two dominions.
The Viceroy took the matter up with the India O ce in London, but received a cagey
reply. ‘We all felt strongly that we should be extremely guarded in dealing with this
request of Gandhi’s’, wrote Lord Listowel; ‘we feel that we should be very careful not to
say that we shall not in any circumstances have closer relations with Pakistan than with
India.’24

‘I have done my job,’ said Jinnah on 9 June, with some justi cation.25 He went on to
address the last meeting of the Muslim League in the Imperial Hotel that day. The
Imperial was Delhi’s grandest hotel, a short distance south of Connaught Circus on the
avenue of Queensway. A perfectly spaced colonnade of royal palms screened its smooth,
green lawns and pristine art deco frontage from the noise, smells and wandering
livestock outside. That Monday, as usual, the better-heeled of Delhi’s visitors were
taking tea on the terrace. The gentle murmur of conversation, and the clink of china
and silver, were the only sounds emanating from a serene company of dignitaries,
American journalists and grand European ladies. Upstairs, in the ballroom, Jinnah took
to the stage in front of 425 delegates to present them with Mountbatten’s plan.
Suddenly, a mob of fty Khaksars – the fundamentalist sect that had been massing in
Delhi for a month – burst through the palm colonnade on to the lawn, waving
sharpened spades and shouting, ‘Get Jinnah!’ The hotel guests scattered; cups of
Darjeeling tea smashed on the marble tiles, and chairs and tables overturned as the
Khaksars stormed through the lounge and up the staircases. There they were met by
Muslim League national guards, and a battle ensued. Jinnah would have been entitled
to panic: the only serious assassination attempt ever made against him had been by a
Khaksar who had broken into his house and stabbed him, four years previously. Instead
he remained perfectly calm, and continued with his meeting while clashes, screams and
thuds echoed up the stairs. He was addressed in the Persian style as ‘Shahenshah-ePakistan’ – Emperor of Pakistan. ‘I am a soldier of Pakistan, not its Emperor,’ he swiftly
replied. The Mountbatten plan was accepted by 300 votes to 10. Soon the police arrived
to subdue the combatants with tear gas, and Jinnah escaped without a scratch. The
Imperial was not so fortunate. That evening, red-eyed guests still blinking away the tear
gas sat down for dinner at its Shahnaz restaurant on broken furniture. A party from the
Viceroy’s House arrived, and was taken to the Mughal Suite on the rst oor. Edwina
Mountbatten was one of those who picked their way through the wreckage to enjoy a
banquet of homard à l’armoricaine and selle d’agneau farci de la paté, with a chilled glass
of Chablis Premier Cru 1936.26
On 18 June, the Mountbattens ew to the beautiful lakeside city of Srinagar, for a visit
to the largest of India’s princely states, Kashmir. Nehru had already warned
Mountbatten that the Muslim-majority Kashmir might prove to be a problem.
Mountbatten knew the Hindu Maharaja, Sir Hari Singh, having rst met him in Calcutta
at Christmas dinner in 1921, for which Sir Hari had been specially selected as one of the
British government’s best behaved princely allies. Their acquaintance had been
su ciently cordial that Dickie and Edwina had holidayed with him at Srinagar as late as
1946.27
It was known that the Maharaja wanted Kashmir independent, a scheme unpalatable
to Nehru, Gandhi and the British. The Mountbattens’ visit to Kashmir was not a raging
success. At the opening banquet, Dickie accidentally set o a bell that had been installed
under the table, which alerted the band to play ‘God Save the King’. The band dutifully

struck up, at which guests dropped their chicken curry and scrambled to their feet.
Mountbatten and the Maharaja’s son cracked up with laughter; but the Maharaja
himself was thunderous with rage. The following day, the Maharaja dispatched the
Viceroy on a long, lonely shing trip.28 When he was allowed to return, Mountbatten
found Sir Hari reluctant to be in his company. The two only spoke during drives
together. On one of these, Mountbatten assured the Maharaja that he would be allowed
a free choice of which dominion to join after 15 August, emphasizing the importance of
ascertaining the will of the Kashmiri people, but making it clear that any moves to
independence would be foolish and dangerous.29
Mountbatten had asked Nehru to brief him on Kashmir just before he left for Srinagar,
and received an essay in return arguing that, despite its overwhelming Muslim
population of 92 per cent in Kashmir proper (excluding Jammu) and 77 per cent
overall, ‘The normal and obvious course appears to be for Kashmir to join the
Constituent Assembly of India.’ Furthermore, ‘It is absurd to think that Pakistan would
create trouble if this happens.’30 Nehru himself was a Kashmiri by descent, and his
detachment would repeatedly fail him when dealing with his ancestral state.
Nonetheless, there was another reason for his desperation to secure Kashmir. If the
North-West Frontier Province went to Pakistan, India would lose the Hindu Kush
mountains – its natural defence against attack from the north. Mountbatten was
insisting that a plebiscite be held in the NWFP, to the despair of Nehru and Gandhi. If
both the NWFP and Kashmir went to Pakistan, there would be nothing but farmland
between India and the Soviets, the Afghans, the Pakistanis, and the Chinese.31 The
danger from the north was real and immediate, especially after 2 July, when
Afghanistan revived its old claim to territory on the North-West Frontier, comprising
most of the land between the Indus and the border. Fears abounded that the Afghans
were being encouraged by the Russians, though some in India wondered whether their
action was more to do with pan-Islamic ambitions. Nehru received a package of papers
from an anonymous correspondent. ‘After Jinnah’s Pakistan has liquidated all Hindus
inside its boundaries the big JEHAD of the twentieth Century will begin,’ it said. The
correspondent went on to allege that Muslims in India had been directed to act as fth
columns among the Hindus, and ‘In the name of religion Mohammedan women are
being ordered to entice Hindu men.’32 Nonsense though this was, the number of similar
protests indicates that communal feeling was becoming ever more perilous.
One month later, the North-West Frontier plebiscite would register a decisive vote to
join Pakistan, with 289,244 for Pakistan against only 2874 for India. Mountbatten
declared himself most satis ed with having ‘insisted on the referendum in spite of the
strongest possible opposition’ from Congress.33 Neither he, nor his sta , nor anyone in
London, seems to have realized that the die had been cast for conflict in Kashmir.
The Mountbattens returned from Kashmir on 23 June. That day, the Punjab voted in
favour of its own partition; Bengal had already done so. Sir Cyril Radcli e, a London
barrister, was own in to take up the onerous and vulnerable job of drawing the lines of
partition. He had been nominated by the British government with the approval of
Jinnah.34 The Muslim League’s victory over the principle of basing statehood on identity

inspired all sorts of new demands. The 3.5 million Pathans in the north-west were
raising a call for a separate state of Pathanistan, and the ‘Frontier Gandhi’, Abdul
Gha ar Khan, added his voice to that call on 2 July.35 The original Gandhi also
supported Pathanistan, though Jinnah condemned it as ‘disastrous’.36 The following day,
Tamil separatists in the south cabled Attlee from Madras to note that they also wanted a
separate Dravidanadu for Muslims and Dravidian people.37 Shortly afterwards, it was
reported that the Naga tribes in Assam were keen to establish a Nagastan; their leaders
turned up in Delhi, threatening to ght ‘to the last drop of their blood’ to win
independence.38 The Sikhs were split over whether or not to accept partition, and some
among them still hoped for a separate Khalistan. A Sikh protest day against the
partition of the Punjab was declared. Many went to their gurdwaras wearing black
armbands, and rumblings began to be heard from agitators. ‘With clear vision,
determination, and vigour that is characteristic of our virile race, we shall extricate
ourselves out of this whirlpool of annihilation that is facing us’, read one pamphlet. ‘Our
phoenix-like rise shall signal the fall of our enemies.’39
This rapidly expanding chaos made the British keener still to escape from India. In
late June, riots in Lahore and Amritsar had left hundreds of houses burnt down. People
running from their blazing homes were shot in the street for breaking the curfew order.
Nehru was horri ed, and asked Mountbatten to declare martial law. ‘If you will forgive
a personal touch, I should like to tell you that my mother came from Lahore and part of
my childhood was spent there’, he wrote to Mountbatten. ‘The fate of Lahore, therefore,
a ects me perhaps more intimately than it might many other people who are not
connected with that city.’40 It a ected Jinnah, too. ‘I don’t care whether you shoot
Muslims or not,’ he told Mountbatten, ‘it has got to be stopped.’41 The Sikh minister
Baldev Singh advised him to ‘shoot everyone on sight’. But the British government had
made it clear that they would send no more troops or resources. Britain’s debit balance
for imports and exports was running at over £50 million. The Chancellor, Hugh Dalton,
had just announced that imports of tobacco, newsprint, petrol and some foods were to
be scaled back drastically. There was nothing to spare for India. All Mountbatten could
propose was the setting up of a multi-faith security committee, which would sit in Delhi
and resolve that things would be better if everyone stopped killing each other.
On 4 July 1947 – the 171st anniversary of another independence day in another of
Britain’s colonies – the Indian Independence Bill was introduced into the House of
Commons. Not only in India had its passage been perilous. Three days earlier, Churchill
had written to Attlee in tones of profound outrage, demanding that the name of the bill
be changed to ‘The India Bill, 1947’ or ‘The India Self-Government Bill’. India was
becoming a dominion, he argued, not an independent state: if the word ‘independence’
remained, he would not be able to vote for it.42 Had the bill’s name been changed at this
stage, Congress could not have accepted it. On the other hand, the prospect of forcing
the bill through parliament without Conservative Party support raised the unthinkable
possibility of it being defeated. Either eventuality would keep Britain in India and
sabotage all the progress that had been made.
Under the circumstances, Attlee did the best thing he could possibly have done. He did

not reply to Churchill’s letter until the morning of 4 July itself, and then pointed out
that it was too late to change anything. Churchill, who was recuperating after a hernia
operation and had less of a ght in him than usual, gru y accepted this, noting that his
protest would remain on record.43
A founding principle of Mountbatten’s plan was the reappointment of himself as joint
Governor General of both new dominions for a short period after 15 August. Nehru had
acquiesced; Jinnah had hedged, and recommended separate Governors General with a
Supreme Arbitrator – in which post he was happy to have Mountbatten – to oversee such
matters as the division of nancial assets and arms stocks.44 Foolishly, Mountbatten had
assumed that Jinnah would eventually come round to the idea of a single Governor
General. As might have been guessed from his doodle on 2 June, Jinnah wanted to
become Governor General himself.45
During the last week of June, Jinnah announced that he would be unable to accept
any position apart from Governor General of Pakistan in six weeks’ time. ‘What I
thought would happen funnily enough’, wrote Edwina to Patricia, ‘and which neither
Daddy nor any of his sta EVER contemplated has occurred’. 46 Mountbatten tried to
convince Jinnah that he would have more power as Prime Minister of Pakistan – an
argument which a lawyer as assiduous as Jinnah would immediately have seen to be
false. ‘In my position it is I who will give the advice and others who will act on it,’
replied the Quaid-e-Azam, who had clearly read the terms of the Indian Independence
Bill very closely. ‘Do you realise what this will cost you?’ asked Mountbatten. ‘It may
cost me several crores [tens of millions] of rupees in assets,’ Jinnah replied. ‘It may well
cost you the whole of your assets and the future of Pakistan,’ snarled Mountbatten, and
stormed out of the room.47
Attlee told the cabinet that Jinnah’s demand ‘was no more than an indication of his
own egotism’.48 Vain though Jinnah may have been, it would be unfair to attribute his
action solely to a lust for fancy titles. He had turned down a British knighthood and
sternly rebuked those who attempted to dub him Emperor of Pakistan.
A more convincing reason for Jinnah’s refusal of Mountbatten’s candidacy was
personal. Delhi was no place to keep a secret, and the gossips soon ensured that Jinnah
found out about Mountbatten showing Nehru the then-secret plan at Simla on 10 May.
He also found out that Nehru had been allowed to rewrite it.49 It was obvious that the
Viceroy liked Nehru, and even close friends of Mountbatten would later admit that his
corresponding dislike of Jinnah had become obvious by this point.50 Mountbatten had
repeatedly proclaimed his preference for a united India, creating fears in the Muslim
League that a joint Governor Generalship might favour the reabsorption of Pakistan, in
line with Congress hopes.51
But there was more to it than that. Yahya Bakhtiar, a Baluchistani politician who was
a close associate of Jinnah’s, argued that a joint Governor Generalship under
Mountbatten would have meant Pakistan ‘getting destroyed at inception’. By July,
Jinnah had very strong reasons to suspect that Mountbatten was wrapped around

Nehru’s nger. ‘Nehru in those days was having a roaring love a air with Lady
Mountbatten,’ added Bakhtiar, ‘said to be with the tacit approval of Mountbatten.’52
There is an intriguing tale told by S.S. Pirzada, later Foreign Minister of Pakistan, that
Jinnah had been handed a small collection of letters that had been written by Edwina
and Jawahar. ‘Dickie will be out tonight – come after 10.00 o’clock,’ said one of
Edwina’s.
Another revealed that: ‘You forgot your handkerchief and before Dickie could spot it I
covered it up.’ A third said: ‘I have fond memories of Simla – riding and your touch.’
Pirzada claimed that Jinnah discussed what to do about these letters with Fatima and
his colleagues. In the end, Jinnah concluded that ‘Caesar’s wife should be above
suspicion’, and had the letters returned.53 If this incident really did occur in late June
1947, it provides a credible reason for Jinnah’s sudden switch from agreeing that
Mountbatten could be a Supreme Arbitrator to refusing him any role whatsoever in
Pakistan. Perhaps Edwina and Jawahar were just good friends at this point and the
rumours of a roaring love a air jumped the gun; such details may be something that
only the two of them will ever know. But exactly how roaring the love a air may have
been by this point is of little consequence. They were known to be close, and they were
known to have political in uence with each other. The Pakistani government could not
be expected to tolerate a situation in which its Governor General’s wife was to any
substantial degree intimate with the Prime Minister of India. Jinnah could not have
accepted Mountbatten’s candidacy.54
On the evening of 2 July, Jinnah came to see Mountbatten, and told him atly that
the Muslim League would not negotiate further. Mountbatten sat with the Quaid-e-Azam
for over four hours attempting to persuade, cajole and even bully him into changing his
mind. The Viceroy dangled the carrot of British favour, and raised the stick of economic
disadvantage: but Jinnah was completely immovable.55
As soon as Jinnah’s position was known, the India O ce drew up a top-secret
memorandum. There was a speci c danger in the provisional constitution: the powers
granted to the Governor General of each dominion were ‘exceedingly wide’, allowing
him a free hand in controlling most institutions of state, including the judiciary; not
requiring him to act on the advice of his constituent assembly; and prescribing no limit
to his tenure of o ce. ‘This position is innocuous and convenient if the GovernorGeneral is a disinterested and transitory Englishman such as Lord Mountbatten,’ noted
the India O ce, whose sta perhaps did not know him awfully well. ‘Quite di erent
considerations plainly arise if the holder of the o ce is an ambitious Indian.’ The
memorandum predicted serious disturbances after the transfer of power, and
recommended that full plans for the evacuation of all British troops and civilians be
made without hesitation.56
Mountbatten was personally hurt by Jinnah’s decision, and his sense of crisis was so
acute that he ew Lord Ismay back to London to present the situation to the cabinet.
Ismay reported that Mountbatten feared that, ‘If he accepted the Congress invitation
after being largely responsible for partition, he might be subsequently criticised for
siding with Congress and for failing in impartiality during his period of o ce as

Viceroy.’ This was an accurate prediction. But both Attlee and Lord Listowel felt strongly
that Dickie should be persuaded to stay on. Listowel argued that Mountbatten could
in uence India to stay in the Commonwealth and to negotiate defence arrangements
that would be bene cial to Britain. Moreover, he admitted, ‘The partition of assets
between the two Dominions would in any event work out unfavourably for Pakistan;
Lord Mountbatten would be in a better position than anyone else to exercise a
moderating in uence on Congress policy in this matter.’ 57 Though the cabinet conceded
that Mountbatten’s personal reputation might su er, it resolved to ask him to carry on
as Indian Governor General – in the interests, principally, of his own country.
Ismay next went to discuss the matter with Churchill, who was happy to accept
Jinnah’s candidacy for Governor General of Pakistan. He was also concerned that India
retain a strong British in uence in the form of Mountbatten. He emphasized that
Mountbatten would be particularly useful in three key roles: ‘He can strive to mitigate
quarrels between Hindu and Moslem, safeguard the position of the Princes, when that is
involved, and preserve such ties of sentiment as are possible between the Government
of Hindustan and that of the other Dominions (or Commonwealths) of the Crown.’58 All
of these roles would have been just as relevant in Pakistan as in India, but Churchill
already had good reason to be con dent of Pakistan’s obedience: he trusted Jinnah to
run it in a way that would serve British interests. Meanwhile Jinnah, who saw as clearly
as anyone else the advantage of having one overseeing body to regulate the partition
awards, arms and resources distribution and so on, lobbied Churchill and Attlee to set up
a council from among the British government to act as such. The intention was clear. He
still wanted a Supreme Arbitrator, but not Mountbatten. His suggestion was ignored.59
On 9 July, under pressure from the cabinet, the opposition, and the King,
Mountbatten agreed, with great reluctance, to stay on.60 ‘Everyone seems to think the
decision has been a right one’, wrote Edwina to Lady Reading, ‘although I myself am
still worried at its implications, not personal of course, but as to whether it was really
the right decision for the people of this country.’61 The achievement of separate
Governors General was, however, a great victory for Jinnah, and no one could be in
any doubt at his satisfaction. He held press conferences in fanless rooms, amid hordes of
sweating journalists, at which he wore an immaculate white silk suit and smoked cigars
while informing them cheerfully about his modern, democratic and inclusive vision for
Pakistan.62
For all Jinnah’s publicity, it was Mountbatten’s name that shone out from the
headlines. That day, the world’s media had been able at last to con rm what they had
keenly suspected for months, if not years. Lieutenant Philip Mountbatten, RN, was
engaged to marry Princess Elizabeth of Great Britain, the woman who would be Queen.
The Mountbatten connection was not lost on the press: the Times of India printed a
warm editorial noting the Viceroy’s contributions to Philip’s upbringing. Dickie himself
was elated: ‘I am sure she couldn’t have picked a better man’, he wrote to Attlee.63
Edwina wrote to Lady Reading that Philip was ‘extremely cultured, well-read, of a
progressive mind … In fact he will I think be a breath of fresh air into the Royal
circle’.64

Thoughts of thrones and crowns and ermine were soon to consume them all.
Mountbatten had persuaded India’s political leaders to accept his plan. For his next
trick, he would have to persuade each of the 565 princely rulers to join one of the two
new dominions. The clock was ticking. Less than a month remained before the British
would finally leave India.

Nehru family portrait, circa 1899. Left to right: Swarup Rani, Motilal, Jawaharlal.

‘A beam of light that pierced the darkness’: Mohandas Gandhi and his wife Kasturba.
A reluctant Jawahar marries Kamala Kaul, 1916.

‘I think we are going to be great friends’: David (front), the future King Edward VIII, on his imperial tour with Dickie
Mountbatten.
Hollywood honeymoon: Dickie and Edwina Mountbatten (2nd and 3rd right) on set with Charlie Chaplin (centre) and Cecil

B. DeMille (3rd left).
Gandhi (left background, bare-chested) arrives with his Salt Marchers at Dandi, 6 April 1931, to collect salt in defiance of
British law.
Ramsay MacDonald, standing, presides over the 2nd Round Table Conference, London, 1931. This attempt to move towards
Indian self-rule failed, owing in part to the massive number of delegates. Gandhi is sitting centre, fourth right from
MacDonald.

Balmoral, summer 1936: King Edward VIII (in cloak) is joined by friends, including (left) Dickie Mountbatten, and (right)
Wallis Simpson and Edwina Mountbatten. A few months later, the King would abdicate to marry Mrs Simpson.
Grand strategy conferences
Jawaharlal Nehru and Mohandas Gandhi agreeing the ‘Quit India’ plan in defiance of the British raj, 1942.

World War II Allies, 1943. Seated centre left, Winston Churchill; centre right, Franklin D. Roosevelt; standing, centre, Dickie
Mountbatten. Sir Hastings Ismay is to the left of Mountbatten. Seated to the left of Churchill is Admiral Ernest King, who
Mountbatten accidentally shot in the leg.
Captured in a rare moment of mutual good humour: Jawaharlal Nehru and Mohammad Ali Jinnah, 1946.

24 March 1947: Dickie Mountbatten is sworn in as Viceroy of India. Edwina is to the right of Dickie. Standing to the left of
the picture can be seen Jawaharlal Nehru, in black sherwani and white cap; to the left of Nehru is Vallabhbhai Patel, in
white khadi. Liaquat Ali Khan is standing to the right of Edwina, in a light suit and a black cap.
28 March 1947: At the Viceroy’s first garden party, Edwina sits on a sofa with Nan Pandit and Pamela Mountbatten.
Jawahar sits at Edwina’s feet.

Front page news, 31 March 1947: Gandhi, at his first meeting with the Mountbattens, leans on Edwina for support.
It was no secret that the Mountbattens got on less well with the Muslim League leaders. Left to right: Liaquat Ali Khan,
Jinnah, Dickie, Fatima Jinnah, Edwina.

‘Like the Blitz at its worst’: Edwina inspecting riot damage in the Punjab, April 1947.
3 June 1947: for the first time in history, no party raises an objection to the plan for independence. Clockwise around the
table from centre: Dickie, Jinnah, Liaquat, Abdur Rab Nishtar, Baldev Singh, K. R. Kripalani, Vallabhbhai Patel, Jawahar.
Independence days

Pakistan’s Independence Day, 14 August 1947. ‘I won’t pretend I wasn’t scared’: driving through Karachi, Dickie and
Jinnah maintain brave faces despite an assassination threat.
India’s Independence Day, 15 August 1947: a rainbow appears in the sky as the new flag is raised. Dickie salutes; to the
right, Edwina and Jawahar in conversation.

15 August 1947, Delhi: crowds greet the Mountbattens.
Calcutta, August 1947: Gandhi (with grand-niece Manu) plugs his ears against the screams of rioters.

‘A great and unique love’: brought together by their work with the victims of India’s partition, Jawahar and Edwina can be
seen holding hands during a visit to a refugee camp in this rare photograph.
October 1947: crowds gather in riot-torn Delhi to hear Gandhi and Nehru call for peace.

‘We have so long been the “Aunt Sally” of politics in India that our reappearance in that role is hardly surprising’: the
Mountbattens in Gwalior during the Kashmir crisis, December 1947.
‘His sister slipped up before each photograph and tried gently to uncurl his desperately clenched hands’: the dying Jinnah
photographed by Margaret Bourke-White, 1948.

‘A thousand years later that light will still be seen in this country’: Jawahar climbs the gatepost of Birla House to tell the
crowds of Gandhi’s murder, 30 January 1948.
‘Only the eyes revealed stark anguish’: Jawahar (centre) at Gandhi’s funeral, 31 January 1948. Edwina sits behind him.

Mashobra, May 1948: Dickie and Pamela Mountbatten in their car, just outside the Governor-General’s Retreat. Edwina and
Jawahar are in the back.

‘They really dote on each other in the nicest way’: Edwina and Jawahar walking together in the forests around Mashobra.
‘Hundreds of thousands will be sorrowful at the news that you have gone’: Edwina and a downcast Jawahar at the
Mountbattens’ farewell dinner.

More goodbyes: Dickie bids farewell to Rajagopalachari while, in the background, Jawahar kisses Edwina’s hand.
‘It was not a bang but with a kiss you left us’: Edwina hugs India’s new Governor-General, Chakravarty Rajagopalachari, as
the Mountbattens leave for London, 21 June 1948.

Keeping in touch: Edwina and Jawahar in London, 1955.
‘He had sat between Mrs Kennedy and her sister and with the light of love in his eyes’: Indian state visit to Washington,
1961. Left to right: Jacqueline Kennedy, Jawahar, Indira Gandhi, John F. Kennedy.

‘Theirs had been a harmony of difference, cemented by their mutual admiration for the Mahatma, on the one hand, and the
very human Edwina, on the other’: Dickie is the first British visitor to Jawahar’s lying in state, 1964. With Dickie is
Jawahar’s sister, Nan Pandit.

CHAPTER 13: A FULL BASKET OF APPLES

ON 18 JULY, THE KING SIGNED THE INDIA INDEPENDENCE ACT in London, and the Mountbattens celebrated
their silver wedding anniversary in Delhi, twenty- ve years after having become
engaged in that city.1 They received numerous congratulatory gifts and messages from a
cross-section of society – everything from an intricate solid silver model of a palace from
the Maharaja of Bikaner, to grubby notes from schoolchildren – but the most memorable
of all was the very rst to arrive. At an early hour of that morning, a message arrived
from Gandhi. Pointedly, it was written to Edwina, addressing her as ‘Dear Sister’.
Edwina was deeply touched. ‘I hope that your joint career here will blossom into
citizenship of the world’, the Mahatma wrote.2 But, though the Mountbattens’ careers
were blossoming, they were not doing so jointly. Dickie would come up to Edwina’s
room every night to kiss her goodnight before returning to work. Every night, there was
a row.3
Other friends were beginning to worry about Edwina. ‘As for yourself, my dear I wish
you would gain a little weight’, wrote one. ‘I do hope you’re nding time to relax.’4 She
was not. For one thing, there was her anniversary party to manage: guests included
Nehru, Jinnah, all of the cabinet and most prominent Congress and Muslim League
gures, which must have made for a vexing seating plan. Jinnah turned up half an hour
late, uncharacteristically. Auchinleck’s secretary, Shahid Hamid, remembered meeting
Jinnah in a corridor, and remarking on his apparent insouciance. ‘My boy,’ Jinnah
replied, ‘do you think I would come to this damn man’s party on time? I purposely came
late to show him I despise him.’5 The relationship between the Mountbattens and Jinnah
was now in a parlous state. At the dinner, Edwina described Jinnah as being ‘in an
unbearable mood and quite hopeless … God help Pakistan.’6
In addition to hosting this dinner, Edwina embarked upon two major healthcare
initiatives that week. On 17 July, she made a public appeal for nurses and midwives
through the Countess of Du erin Fund. Three days later, she launched a campaign to
recruit 14,200 health visitors in the ght against tuberculosis.7 She took a special
interest in a Nursing Council Bill, a piece of legislation that had been drifting around
unpassed since 1943. It had been proposed to set standards for public health, and
Edwina was desperate to get it passed before partition. She embarked upon a campaign
of intense lobbying among her political contacts, but at the very last moment it looked
as though the bill might fail. It might have been expected that the Vicereine would speak
to the Viceroy over such a matter. Instead, Edwina went to talk to Jawahar. Within two
days, the bill had been approved.8
Behind the scenes, her political activities were explicitly left-leaning. ‘I wish I could
completely share people’s views about Ernie Bevin as to his sincerity and vision, but I

just can’t’, she wrote to a friend. ‘I feel myself that his hatred of the Communists and his
fear of them blinds him in making decisions that very largely a ect foreign as well as
home policy.’ Jawahar introduced her to a wider spectrum of political gures. At his
house she met Indonesian exiles escaping the latest ‘ghastly Dutch aggression’, and
heard their ‘shattering’ stories.9 International news was at its most dramatic that week.
On 19 July, Mountbatten’s and Nehru’s friend Aung San was sitting in a meeting of his
executive council when gunmen burst in and shot him dead, along with six colleagues.10
Meanwhile, Liaquat was reporting to Mountbatten that relations between the future
o cials of Pakistan and India had become so tense that they could no longer work
together. The secretaries of Pakistani departments had been turfed out of their o ces
and sent to work among the clerks; there was no space to do so, and so the grounds of
the government o ces were now full of pitiable little groups of Pakistani o cials,
reduced to setting up desks under trees. ‘I was one of the strongest opponents of rushing
partition through by the 15th August,’ Liaquat told Mountbatten, ‘but I now wish to God
you could get partition through by the 1st August.’11
Against this background of upheaval, Mountbatten felt that he had to refocus
attention on the matter in hand, and on 20 July issued each of his sta with a tear-o
calendar. The day of the month was at the top and, underneath it in bold, the words: ‘X
days left to prepare for the Transfer of Power’.12 Yet it was he himself who could not be
detached from trivialities. In the middle of July 1947, while negotiations about defence,
nance, partition, the possible independence of several princely states and the future of
400 million people raged around him, the Viceroy spent hours fussing about ags. ‘In
previous reports I have expressed the hope that I would be able to persuade the new
Dominions to have the Union Jack in the upper canton of their ags as do other
members of the Commonwealth’, he cabled to London. ‘This design has not been
accepted by either part.’13 The Muslim League felt that it would be distasteful to
juxtapose the Christian crosses of the Union Jack with the crescent of Islam; Congress
agreed that the retention of the British emblem would upset hardliners; the British
government did not really give a hoot what they did. Having lost that battle,
Mountbatten turned his attention to the woefully minor issue of Governor General ags
– the ensigns that would be own on top of residences and car bonnets. A week later, he
nearly came to blows with Jinnah when the Quaid-e-Azam rejected his designs. ‘He was
only saved from being struck by the arrival of the other members of the Partition
Council at this moment,’ Mountbatten reported to London. ‘However, I sent Ismay
round to beat him up as soon as possible, and Jinnah claimed that I must have
misunderstood him.’14
There was one more enormous obstacle to be overcome before partition, and that was
the question of what would happen to India’s princely states. Each of the 565 princely
states in India had a separate agreement with the government, ensuring the
paramountcy of the British Crown over its a airs. It had taken centuries to bring the
states under paramountcy, and many still operated through arcane systems of
government and society. It was the boast of the Empire’s supporters that the reassuring
eminence of the Indian Civil Service, sta ed almost entirely with public-school-educated

British men, kept things on track. Some thought this the pinnacle of British achievement,
allowing the states their freedom of cultural diversity while tempering the worst
excesses of absolute rule. The idea was to leave rulers as independent as possible; in
case of trouble, for the British to o er the ruler in question ‘private counsel’; and, should
that not x the trouble, to intervene. In the event of gross totalitarianism or outright
rebellion, the British raj would remove the individual prince who had proved to be a bad
egg, install a more responsible scion of his family, and leave the dynasty intact.15
Unfortunately, this appealing portrait of a smooth, tolerant and accountable system
was a ction. In reality, the British presence in India was relatively small and unable to
keep watch over so many princes. The notion that the ‘British race’ had a monopoly on
freedom and democracy was unsupportable with regard to the lengthy traditions of
public debate, heterogeneous government and freedom of conscience that had existed
for centuries in the Indias of Asoka and Akbar.16 If anything, the presence of the British
damaged these traditions, and actually safeguarded the princes from any new incursion
of democracy. The British Army was always on hand to give succour to each imperilled
tyrant, and stamp out any attempts by the people to express their discontent. As one
staunch imperialist boasted, the princes had been ‘mostly rescued from imminent
destruction by British protection’.17 And so imperialists were able to perfect a classic
piece of doublethink: railing against what they called ‘Oriental despotism’ on one hand,
while propping it up with the other.
Even the illiberal Lord Curzon had been appalled by the standard of princely
behaviour during his viceroyalty, half a century before. He had written to Queen
Victoria that ‘for all these failures we are responsible. We have allowed the chiefs when
young to fall into bad hands. We have condoned their extravagances, we have worked
at their vices.’18 Though he conceded that some of the princes were ‘capable and
patriotic men’, many more were ‘frivolous and sometimes vicious spendthrifts and
idlers’. In the latter category, he counted such men as the Maharaja Rana of Dholpur,
‘an inebriate and a sot’; the Raja of Chumba, who had ‘crippled himself by
intemperance’; the Maharaja of Patiala, ‘little better than a jockey’; the Raja of
Kapurthala, who was ‘only happy when philandering in Paris’. ‘As Your Majesty knows,’
he added, ‘the Maharaja Holkar is half mad and is addicted to horrible vices.’ This last
was a particularly pointed comment – Victoria liked Holkar, because he had once sent
her a telegram on her birthday. It was unfortunate, for ‘half mad’ underestimated his
insanity by around 50 per cent. He would stand at a high window overlooking his
subjects and issue random edicts as they popped into his head, once ordering the
abduction of every man wearing a black coat. Once, he harnessed the bankers of Indore
to a state coach and whipped them soundly as he drove them around the city.19
During his tour of India in 1921, the young Dickie Mountbatten had admired the
princely states, but was shocked by their inequality. In Udaipur, he wondered at the
habit of feeding pigs when people were starving, an injustice that prompted him to
note, ‘There are times when I do sympathize with the Bolsheviks.’20 Princely excesses
were common in states where the vast majority of people were destitute. The Jam Sahib
of Nawanagar had 157 cars and a wife with 1700 saris.21 The Nawab of Junagadh spent

£21,000 on a wedding for two of his dogs.22 The Maharaja of Patiala moved into
London’s Savoy Hotel, occupying all thirty- ve suites on the fth oor, and ordered that
3000 fresh roses be brought to decorate his rooms every day.23 Visitors to the miserly
Nizam of Hyderabad would have seen that he used what looked like a crumpled ball of
old newspaper as a paperweight – little suspecting that wrapped in it was the 185 carat
Jacob Diamond, twice the size of the Koh-i-Noor.24 The Gaekwar of Baroda’s second
wife, Sita Devi, earned herself the nickname of ‘India’s Wallis Simpson’ when she
plundered the state treasury to nance her jewellery habit. Sita Devi made away to
Switzerland with untold riches, including the incomparable Baroda pearl carpet. This
remarkable object measured six feet by seven and a half feet, and was made up of 1.4
million pearls, 2520 rose-cut diamonds, and hundreds of emeralds and rubies,
embroidered on to deerskin and silk in delicate arabesques.25
The journalist Webb Miller was treated to a glimpse of a typical princely attitude at
the Cecil Hotel in Simla in 1930. His Highness Ali Nawaz Khan, the Mir of Khairpur, was
dining that night. The Mir was striking to behold: so grotesquely fat that he could not
get his face closer than two feet to the table. ‘His paunch was bespattered with soup
spilled on its way from the plate to his distant mouth,’ remembered Miller.26 This
glutton, who commanded a private army as well as forty lucky wives back in his state,
had ordered his desperately poor subjects to oppose Gandhi, the independence
movement and even any move to dominion status. ‘The interests of the Indian native
rulers are identical with those of the British government,’ the Mir’s minister told Miller
silkily. ‘They believe if the present status is altered it will injure their interests.’27 The
Mir was by no means unique. Four decades after Curzon’s letter to Victoria, the then
Viceroy, Lord Wavell, wrote a remarkably similar one to his monarch, George VI.
According to him, the Nizam of Hyderabad was ‘an eccentric miser with a bad record of
misrule’, the Maharaja of Kashmir ‘little better’, the Maharaja of Gwalior ‘a nice lad and
means well, but cares more for his horses and racing than anything else’, the Khan of
Kalat ‘stupid’, the Maharaja of Travancore ‘a non-entity’, and the Maharaja of Indore ‘a
poor creature, physically and morally’.28
These are some of the grosser examples of princely behaviour, and should not be
taken as a slander against every individual prince. Some among them were men and
women of great intelligence, ability and compassion. A Gaekwar of Baroda introduced
the rst free, compulsory education in India in 1894. A Maharaja of Travancore
introduced progressive land reforms in the early 1880s. One turn-of-the-century
Maharaja of Cochin was greatly admired for his modernizing legal reforms – though he
became so frustrated at the complacency of his British patrons that he abdicated in
1914.29 But the existence of a few commendable examples does not vindicate the
system. The reason that the Indian princely states were uniquely badly ruled was the
very fact of British protection. Aside from their consciences, the princes had no incentive
to govern well. Foreign invaders would be dealt with, domestic challenges neutered, and
the ravening mob readily suppressed, all by the might of the British Indian Army.
Mountbatten set up a States Department in July, convinced by then of the need to
absorb the states into India or Pakistan rather than surrender them to the capricious rule

of their princes.30 India’s o er to the states was straightforward. Control over defence,
foreign a airs, and communications would go to the government of India. Their
domestic a airs, including their privy purses, were to be their own concern. Nehru had
told Mountbatten that ‘I will encourage rebellion in all States that go against us,’ which
had caused the Viceroy to question his friend’s sanity.31 ‘On the subject of the States,’
Mountbatten reported to London, ‘Nehru and Gandhi are pathological.’ He was relieved
that the unsentimental Vallabhbhai Patel had been made head of the department rather
than the more emotional Nehru.32 For Patel’s part, he realized immediately that
Mountbatten, with his own semi-royal status and personal friendships with many of the
princes, was uniquely suited to help India achieve its aim of leaving no state behind.
Britain’s intentions towards the states had been deliberately left unclear by Attlee.
Mountbatten was supposed to ‘aid and assist the States in coming to fair and just
arrangements with the leaders of British India as to their future relationships’. But there
was also the command that ‘You will do your best to persuade the rulers of any Indian
States in which political progress has been slow to progress rapidly towards some form
of more democratic government.’33 Mountbatten interpreted this to mean that he should
exert pressure upon each prince to go with the majority of his people in deciding
whether to join India or Pakistan. He agreed to help Patel, and pledged to deliver ‘a full
basket of apples’ before 15 August. To London, he con ded that he would take a great
risk and side entirely with Congress, on the basis that his help would constitute a strong
bargaining point. ‘I am positive that if I can bring in a basket-full of States before the
15th August, Congress will pay whatever price I insist on for the basket’, he wrote. ‘I
need hardly say that unless we can pull this o , India will be in a bit of a mess after the
15th August.’34
With no Pakistani representative to match Mountbatten and Patel in the states
department, the states would turn into a major point of con ict between Indian and
Pakistani interests. But Jinnah did not clamour for the inclusion of a Muslim Leaguer. It
was not that he took no interest; he did, and actively. But he was not especially
concerned about whether states acceded to Pakistan or remained independent. His
strategy was simply to stop them acceding to India. If enough states could be persuaded
to stay out, Nehru and Patel would inherit a moth-eaten India to go with his moth-eaten
Pakistan. And so the stage was set for one of the bitterest, most scandalous and most
secretive battles of the transfer of power, in which Mountbatten and Patel would try
every possible tactic to scare the princes into India, and Jinnah would do everything he
could think of to scare them out of it.
On 9 July, representatives of the states met in New Delhi to ascertain their starting
positions. The great majority inclined to join India. But four of the most important
states – Hyderabad, Kashmir, Bhopal and Travancore – wanted to become independent
nations. Each of these states had its own unique set of di culties. The Nizam of
Hyderabad was the richest man in the world; he was a Muslim, and his people were
mostly Hindus. His state was enormous, and both France and the United States were
rumoured to be ready to recognize it.35 The Maharaja of Kashmir was a Hindu; his
people were mostly Muslims. His state was even bigger than Hyderabad, but more

limited by its lack of trade routes and industrial potential. The Nawab of Bhopal was an
able and ambitious Muslim prince, and one of Jinnah’s advisers: unfortunately for him,
his state had a Hindu majority, and was stuck right in the middle of India, over 500
miles from the likely border with Pakistan. Uranium deposits had recently been
discovered in Travancore, lending the situation there a greater international interest.
Mountbatten and Patel both adopted a pincer attack. On one hand, they described the
princes as their ‘personal friends’ and o ered them ambassadorships, honori cs and
privileges; on the other, they threatened them with disaster. ‘I hope the Indian States
will bear in mind that the alternative to cooperation in the general interest is anarchy
and chaos,’ growled Patel.36 Mountbatten, meanwhile, used his royal connections to
exert pressure on the princes to accede to India. Two of the agents acting for the princes
felt so aggrieved by Mountbatten’s tactics that they compared him, rather excitably, to
Hitler.37 The Nawab of Bhopal attempted to get the states to band together, so that they
might hold out for independence: such a coalition might have formed an area the size of
Pakistan. Not only Lord Mountbatten, but also Lady Mountbatten, crushed the plan,
according to the Maharawal of Dungarpur: ‘It was an end brought about by one man
and his wife.’38
Though Mountbatten’s heavy-handed strategy is certainly open to criticism, his aim
was to bring the states’ people into a democratic India. British historians who have
scolded Mountbatten for that aim have argued that the princes were strong supporters
of Britain during the war, and that they had rights under the British paramountcy
system which were discarded.39 Such arguments ignore the political and immediate
realities of the situation. Many of the princes were regarded as tyrants by the All-India
States Peoples’ Conference (president, 1935–46: Jawaharlal Nehru), an organization set
up to represent the interests of the princes’ 100 million subjects – who counted as
‘British protected persons’.40 By supporting the princes against the people and against
the new dominions of India and Pakistan, Britain would have undermined the entire
process of transferring power to democratic institutions.
No signi cant gure in London was prepared to stand up for the princes. The request
of some states for independence and dominion status had been described by PethickLawrence as ‘rather fanciful’ on 18 April: they had never been formal British territory,
and the British could hardly go around enrolling them into the Empire at this point,
even if they begged to be conquered.41 By the middle of July, when some in Whitehall
were beginning to question Mountbatten’s devices, Attlee allowed a telegram to be sent
to him questioning whether he was riding too rough. Mountbatten’s response was to the
point: ‘I am trying my very best to create an integrated India which, while securing
stability, will ensure friendship with Great Britain. If I am allowed to play my own hand
without interference I have no doubt I will succeed.’42 The India O ce backed down
completely and allowed him his hand back. Nor was the opposition prepared to stick its
neck out. The Nizam cabled Churchill in June asking him to demonstrate his sympathy
and support for the Indian princely order, a cause which he had championed in the past.
Churchill replied with what can only be described as a snub, merely thanking him for his
kind message.43

Mountbatten spent July hustling recalcitrant princes into the Indian fold. The
Maharaja of Indore was most displeased when Mountbatten sent a crack team of fellow
princes to cajole him. Faced with the intimidating sight of the Gaekwar of Baroda, four
Maharajas, and his best friend, the Raja of Sandur, he absconded from his palace and
had to be retrieved. When he returned, he ‘unceremoniously kicked out ve of the Rulers
literally into the passage, keeping only the Gaekwar’. The Gaekwar’s persuasive skills
failed to turn him around. ‘It may not be a bad thing to have a thoroughly
unsatisfactory State like Indore remaining outside the Dominion, as an example of what
happens to States that try and stand on their own,’ Mountbatten reported. ‘If he does
not change his mind and come in I prophesy that the people of Indore will kick their
Ruler off the Gaddi [throne] before the end of September.’44
The Hindu Maharaja of Jodhpur, who had just turned twenty-four and had only
succeeded to the throne in June, provided a dramatic moment. Jinnah had been courting
him, with plans that Patel feared would create ‘a dagger into the very heart of India’, a
spur of Pakistan that would run down through Jodhpur into Bhopal. Mountbatten
explained to the Maharaja that he was legally entitled to join Pakistan, but reminded
him of his Hindu majority. ‘Your Highness is free to stay out, if you like,’ Patel added.
‘But if there is trouble in your State as a result of your decision, you will not get the
slightest support from the Government of India.’45 The Maharaja was shaken by this
clear threat. He turned up at the Viceroy’s House, and was fobbed o with V.P. Menon
while Mountbatten dealt with a Hyderabad delegation in Edwina’s study next door.
Apparently, Menon was not to the Maharaja’s satisfaction. He pulled out a pistol
concealed behind the nib of a very large fountain pen and screamed that he would
‘shoot him down like a dog if he betrayed the starving people of Jodhpur’. Menon talked
him down, and the Maharaja eventually put the gun away – later making a present of it
to Mountbatten, who ‘gave him hell’ for the incident.46
There was further trouble with Travancore. It was incorrectly rumoured that the state
had already reached a private agreement with Britain over the fate of its uranium
deposits, prompting Nehru to threaten that he would send the Indian Air Force to bomb
it.47 Meanwhile, the Maharaja of Travancore refused to throw his lot in with India on
the grounds that Nehru had established diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union.48
When Mountbatten cornered him, the Maharaja professed to see himself as only the
Dewan, or Prime Minister, of Travancore. The real Maharaja, he explained, was the god
Padmanabha, an aspect of Vishnu.49 The Maharaja’s actual Dewan, Sir C.P. Ramaswami
Aiyar, turned up at the Viceroy’s House with a set of les to present to Mountbatten.
‘The rst of these contained a number of rather amusing cartoons, to which he took the
greatest exception,’ Mountbatten reported, ‘and in particular one published that
morning showing him being spanked by me at this very meeting!’ Another le
‘contained cuttings to prove that Gandhi was a dangerous sex maniac who could not
keep his hands o young girls. 50 It took Mountbatten two hours to calm Aiyar down.
Aiyar returned to Travancore, and shortly afterwards was viciously attacked with a
swordstick and almost killed by a rogue agent of the local communist party. The States
Peoples’ Conference put pressure on the Maharaja, who admitted defeat and

telegraphed his instrument of accession to Mountbatten immediately. ‘The adherence of
Travancore after all C.P.’s declarations of independence has had a profound effect on all
the other States and is sure to shake the Nizam,’ Mountbatten noted with satisfaction.51
But it did not. The Nizam of Hyderabad, along with the Maharaja of Kashmir, was to
prove Mountbatten’s biggest stumbling-block. The Nizam employed Sir Walter
Monckton, a London lawyer with exceptionally strong connections in the British
establishment, to ght his corner. Monckton advised the Nizam that, as an
independence ruler, he could increase his army and start munitions factories as well as
appointing his own ministers. ‘I shall do all I can to see that the new Viceroy
understands the vital part which Indian India must continue to play,’ Monckton wrote.52
On 3 June, after Mountbatten had announced the plan for the transfer of power,
Monckton lunched with both Mountbattens and discussed the fate of Hyderabad. The
very next day, he took his concerns to Jinnah. ‘Mr. Jinnah said that Hyderabad could
still give a lead to other States by declaring for independence,’ Monckton noted. ‘This
would very likely hold Mysore independent and would be a source of strength to
Travancore.’ Jinnah even suggested that the independent states could form a bloc to
defend themselves against India.53
By late July, Jinnah was writing to the Nizam in his most honeyed tones. ‘I shall
always remain a friend of Your Exalted Highness and the Mussalmans of Hyderabad,’ he
declared, professing his willingness to help the delegation Hyderabad was sending to
him. ‘But please do not take any nal decision; and I hope, as you say in your letter[,]
you will do so with my “concurrence and knowledge”.’54 Meanwhile, Mountbatten had
managed to convince himself that Monckton was on his side. ‘Monckton and I have now
agreed together on a co-ordinated plan of campaign to bring the Nizam in, and I have
o ered to y down if Monckton feels that he requires my help to pull it o ’, he wrote to
London. ‘As a last resort I shall o er to make his second son “His Highness”‘. 55 Both the
Nizam and Monckton had set their sights rather higher than that, as Monckton’s note to
Jinnah of the same week makes clear. Monckton wrote that the Nizam would de nitely
prefer to have a closer relationship with Pakistan than with India, but that his
geographical position made this di cult. He requested that Jinnah explain what steps
he could take ‘to assist and rescue Hyderabad’ in the event of political or economic
pressure by India. Speci cally, he asked whether Pakistan could guarantee that food,
weaponry and troops be supplied. He wondered whether Pakistan would come to
Hyderabad’s aid in the event of an internal revolt fomented by India, or whether
Pakistan might help Hyderabad gain an outlet to the sea.56
Monckton’s note is stark evidence that Hyderabad was seriously considering a
defensive war against democratic India. It may also have been considering a war of
conquest – for Hyderabad was at least 100 miles from its closest port, and there could be
no way to create an outlet to the sea without annexing Indian territory. The threat
loomed large, until Jinnah pushed his luck too far. ‘Jinnah in e ect said that the State
must earn its own independence by standing on its own feet and making all sacri ces’,
Monckton wrote on 6 August, ‘even, if necessary, including the abdication of the
Nizam.’57 The Nizam had no intention of abdicating, and was forced to look again to

Mountbatten and Patel. He sent Monckton back to Delhi to pull out all the stops.
Monckton saw Ismay and Mountbatten on the afternoon of 10 August, and railed
furiously against the Congress position. He deplored Patel’s intimidation tactics, which
hinted that Hyderabad might face a blockade from India, and threatened to write to
Churchill if the pressure was not let up.58
On 25 July, Mountbatten – in full uniform, and gilded all over with decorations and
orders – clinked his way up the red carpet to the Chamber of Princes at the Council
House in Delhi. Beside him strode the senatorial gure of Vallabhbhai Patel. After the
photographers had been chased from the chamber, Mountbatten stood to address a
glittering throng of nobility. With his trademark combination of form and familiarity,
Mountbatten informed these august presences that they ought to accede either to India
or to Pakistan. He reminded them that the key factors in their choice should be the
feelings and welfare of their subjects, and the geography of their states; he assured them
that they would su er no nancial loss or erosion of sovereignty. As Patel looked on
sagely, he warned them they were being made an o er that was not likely to be
repeated. After 15 August, he would no longer be the Crown representative – and they
would have to negotiate with the Indian or Pakistani governments directly. He added a
detached observation that any armaments they might think of stockpiling would soon be
obsolete.
So dazzling was Mountbatten’s performance that, even though he had just threatened
the princes quite brazenly with conquest and subjugation by a future Indian
government, the tone of the meeting quickly warmed up into a sort of friendly banter.
The high point came when the Dewan of Kutch, representing the ailing Maharao of
Kutch who had gone to Britain for medical treatment, questioned Mountbatten. The
Dewan protested that he did not know his Maharao’s mind, and could not raise him
from his sickbed with a telegram. Mountbatten picked up a glass paperweight that
happened to be on his rostrum. ‘I will look into my crystal,’ he said, ‘and give you an
answer.’ A full ten seconds of astonished silence ensued as Mountbatten peered into the
paperweight. Finally, with faultless comic timing, the Viceroy intoned: ‘His Highness
asks you to sign the Instrument of Accession.’59 Many of the princes laughed, and few
even thought to complain as chits were passed round warning them that the Viceroy was
very busy and that they would not be allowed to speak.60 No commoner could have
pulled o such a daring act of lese-majesty; but many of the princes knew Dickie as a
friend and a near-equal.
That night, Jinnah attended a small dinner-party at the Viceroy’s House. There was an
awkward scene, during which Jinnah implied that Mountbatten was abusing the states
by forcing them to accede too quickly, and pointed out that the British government did
not share this urgency. Afterwards, Jinnah claimed that Edwina Mountbatten agreed
with him. The speci c subject of Kashmir came up. Jinnah noted that an accession either
to India or to Pakistan would spark revolts, though he stated that he would apply no
pressure.61 Apparently, this did not resolve the tensions. At the end of the dinner,
Jinnah deliberately broke protocol by rising to leave the dining room at the same time
as the Mountbattens.62

Two big ies remained in the Kashmiri ointment: the Maharaja, still evading any
form of straight discussion, and Jawaharlal Nehru. Nehru again tried to visit Kashmir at
the end of July, describing it as his ‘ rst priority’.63 He had to be stopped by
Mountbatten, Patel and Gandhi, on the grounds that this would be taken as political
lobbying. According to Mountbatten, when Patel attempted to talk him out of it, ‘Nehru
had broken down and wept, explaining that Kashmir meant more to him at the moment
than anything else.’64 Gandhi went instead, took goat’s milk and fruit under a chinar
tree with the Maharaja and his family, and told them to obey the wishes of their people.
He was afterwards accused of lobbying for India in Nehru’s place.65
On 28 July, Mountbatten held a reception at which he, Patel and V.P. Menon joined
forces to bully the princes. The Maharajas stood around nervously to watch this
daunting triumvirate work on each of their fellows in turn. ‘Who’s H.E. [His Excellency]
getting to work on now?’ one asked. ‘There’s no need for him to work on me. I’m
signing to-morrow!’66 Mountbatten would not be able to provide Patel with a
completely full basket of apples, but it is striking that he managed to secure as many as
he did. After independence, Patel would maintain his focus on the states, corralling
them into groups, extracting from them their vestigial rights and responsibilities, and
assimilating them into the body of democratic India.
Most of the princes, reduced to the status of adequately remunerated mascots, would
disappear quietly into estate management or gin palaces, as they pleased. But an
impressive number of exceptions ran for o ce in the new democratic India. Among
Indian princely families who were guaranteed privileges at the time of their accession,
more than one-third have produced electoral candidates for public o ce. 67 Whatever
may be said about Mountbatten’s tactics or the machinations of Patel, their achievement
remains remarkable. Between them, and in less than a year, it may be argued that these
two men achieved a larger India, more closely integrated, than had 90 years of the
British raj, 180 years of the Mughal Empire, or 130 years of Asoka and the Maurya
rulers.

CHAPTER 14: A RAINBOW IN THE SKY

‘NATIVE RACES WITHIN THE EMPIRE ARE SHOWING AN EVER more lively appreciation of their status’,
reported the British Imperial Review in August 1947. ‘The whole outlook has changed,
and the native has been educated to echo the shibboleths of democracy.’ Selfcongratulation reverberated in the Review‘s tone, as it surveyed the indigenous
movements in New Zealand, Canada and South Africa: ‘the Maori and the Red Indian,
under fostering and enlightened care, have shown a surprising and gratifying ability to
survive … A mere advisory body does not satisfy the Bantu. He wants more executive
power, something nearer equality.’1 Past and present were being revised at a speed to
match Mountbatten’s haste in India. Had not the British Empire always been a kindly,
generous, and even sel ess father gure, gently shepherding ocks of dumb savages
towards freedom and democracy? Old volumes of Lord Macaulay’s essays were retrieved
from the attic and dusted o , and his assertion that the day India achieved self-rule
would be ‘the proudest day in British history’ presented as incontrovertible evidence
that, indeed, that had always been absolutely true.2 There seemed to be no real
di erence in attitude between Macaulay and Mountbatten. It followed, then, that what
went between must have been progress.3
The new spirit of post-colonial liberation seemed to be everywhere. News from
Indonesia provided the sense of superiority: the Dutch had embarked upon a new wave
of atrocities against the indigenous rebels. News from Palestine added to the motivation:
British military lorries were blown up by Jewish terrorists, and two young sergeants
hanged from a tree near Natanya at the end of July. When the sta at the Viceroy’s
House sat down to watch their Sunday lm, Bernard Shaw’s Caesar and Cleopatra, in the
rst week of August, they were treated to the bizarre but apposite spectacle of white
actors with cut-glass English accents dressed up in fake tan, black wigs, linen and beads,
refusing to submit to the Roman Empire with cries of ‘Leave us to settle our own
a airs!’, ‘Yes, go back to your own country!’, ‘Egypt belongs to us, not to you!’, and
‘Egypt for the Egyptians!’
In India itself, security remained perilous. On 27 July huge crowds of Sikhs, estimated
at over 10,000, attempted to enter the All-Punjab Sikh Conference in Lahore, and were
red upon twice by police. Dalip Singh, presiding, observed that ‘The British scheme for
the partition of the country provides for an Empire for the Muslims in India.’4
Responding to the signals of future trouble, Mountbatten took a personal role in
organizing a Punjab Boundary Force, under the command of Major-General T.W. Rees,
whom he described as ‘a marvellous little man’.5 General Rees was supported by two
high-ranking advisers, one Muslim, one Sikh; he had 50,000 mixed troops at his
command, including a high proportion of British o cers. ‘It is probably the largest

military force ever collected in any one area of a country for the maintenance of law
and order in peace-time,’ noted Alan Campbell-Johnson.6 On the same day, Attlee
announced drastic cuts in foreign spending.
The British government was feeling the cold sweat of a nancial crisis that threatened
to overwhelm it. The next day, Sir Sta ord Cripps met the American Under-Secretary of
State in Paris, and tried to persuade him to relax the terms of its $3.75 billion loan, of
which Britain had only $1 billion left. By this point, the government in London was
having secret plans drawn up in case the United States did not let it o the hook. These
included a below subsistence ration of 1700 calories per person per day, and the
conscripting of schoolchildren into agricultural work.7 Five days later Churchill,
recovered from his illness, delivered a rousing speech at his birthplace, Blenheim Palace.
He told an audience of 60,000 Conservatives that the only hope of national recovery
was to have an election and throw out the Labour government.
With these troubles brewing, the Mountbattens’ relationship su ered further. ‘The last
two days have been pretty good Hell’, Ismay wrote to his wife on 5 August. ‘Both Dickie
and Edwina are dead tired, nervy as they can be, and right across each other. So that in
addition to my other troubles, I have been doing peace-maker and general
sedative … It’s very wearing for them, and for me.’8 While Edwina was concerned with
world events and the plight of the growing number of victims of violence in the Punjab,
Dickie seemed to be incapable of seeing beyond protocol. That day, he bothered
Jawahar with a list of dates upon which the Union Jack might continue to be own in
India after independence. It is hard to imagine an issue of less pressing import that
could have consumed the Viceroy’s time just ten days before the transfer of power. That
evening, Edwina went alone to see Jawahar.9
Despite his preoccupation with trivialities, even Mountbatten could not ignore the
erce controversies thrown up by the two partitions of Bengal and the Punjab. For
centuries, both regions had been melting-pots of cultures, a jumbled variety of Muslims
and Hindus living side by side, with Sikhs, Buddhists, Animists and Christians tted in
too. In times of peace, it had not mattered much to which of these religions a Punjabi or
a Bengali adhered. As Jinnah himself had admitted, most people within the regions
tended to consider their local identity before their religious a liation. But the
importance of religious identity had been growing in the twentieth century, notably in
India and more slowly in the world beyond it.
The reason for this e ect can in part be traced to the British policy of ‘divide and
rule’. Undoubtedly, the raj did plenty to encourage identity politics. The British found it
easier to understand their vast domain if they broke it down into manageable chunks,
and by the 1930s they had become anxious to ensure that each chunk was given a full
and fair hearing. But picking a few random unelected lobbyists, based on what the
British thought was a cross-section of Indian varieties, was not a reliable way to
represent 400 million people. India’s population could not be divided into neat boxes
labelled by religion and cross-referenced with social position. India was an amorphous
mass of di erent cultures, lifestyles, traditions and beliefs. After so many centuries of
integration and exchange, these were not distinct, but rippled into each other, creating

a web of cultural hybrids and compromises. A Sunni Muslim from the Punjab might have
more in common with a Sikh than he did with a Shia Muslim from Bengal; a Shia might
regard a Su Muslim as a heretic; a Su might get on better with a Brahmin Hindu than
with a Wahhabi Muslim; a Brahmin might feel more at ease with a European than he
would with another Hindu who was an outcaste. When the British started to de ne
‘communities’ based on religious identity and attach political representation to them,
many Indians stopped accepting the diversity of their own thoughts and began to ask
themselves in which of the boxes they belonged. At the same time, Indian politicians
began to focus on religion as a central part of their policies – de ning themselves by
what they were, and even more by what they were not.10
This phenomenon is shown at its clearest with Jinnah, who began his career as the
leading light of Hindu–Muslim unity, and ended it by forcing the creation of a separate
Islamic-majority state. But the arc of Jinnah’s career merely ampli es that of Indian
politics as a whole. Congress was a largely secular and inclusive organization during
Motilal Nehru’s prime in the rst twenty years of the twentieth century. Though it was
the opposite of his intention, the emergence of Gandhi gave con dence to religious
chauvinists. While Gandhi himself welcomed those of all faiths, the very fact that he
brought spiritual sensibilities to the centre of politics stirred up extreme and divisive
passions. Fundamentalist Hindus were rare presences on the political scene before
Gandhi. In the wake of Gandhi, though, Hindu nationalists were able to move into the
central ground of politics; while organizations like the Hindu Mahasabha and the
Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), dedicated to the formation of a Hindu nation,
swelled their ranks from the fringes. This was no slow, invisible political trend: it was
happening visibly during the spring and summer of 1947, when holy sadhus clad in
sa ron robes marched around the streets of Delhi, bellowing forth political slogans. 11
Rajendra Prasad, who was to become the President of the new Constituent Assembly,
wrote to Nehru on 7 August telling him that since July he had received 164,000 letters
and postcards demanding that cow slaughter be made illegal – a common concern of
devout Hindus, but one which is often used and taken as an anti-Muslim strategy. It was
the Muslims in India, and the Untouchables, who ran the lucrative leather and beef
industries, mostly for export.12 The threat of a ban on cow slaughter naturally drove
Muslims and Untouchables into the arms of more radical political organizations, which
they felt would stick up for them. Whether the British caused division by carving up
politics on the basis of religion, or whether they were simply responding to a trend in
Indian society for Hindu nationalism and the beginnings of an Islamic resurgence, is an
endlessly debatable question.
In an atmosphere of such tension, almost every part of the partition lines could be
disputed by someone. But the three greatest controversies to haunt India’s and
Pakistan’s future were those of two Punjabi districts, Gurdaspur and Ferozepur; and one
Bengali district, Chittagong.
The Punjab is a great sweep of plain, laced with rivers, stretching from the Himalayas
in the north to the Thar Desert in the west. It is one of the most fertile agricultural
regions in the world, frequently described as the ‘bread-basket’ of India. According to a

religious breakdown of the population, the western wing along the Indus had to go to
Pakistan; the eastern wing between the Sutlej and Jumna Rivers had to go to India. The
central sections were in dispute, mainly because they were rich, populous districts, and
strategically important. Religiously speaking, the populations in those central tracts
were far too integrated and too complex for a straight partition of their land. The
economic case was labyrinthine. There would be con icting interests over the divisions
of holy shrines, railways, defensive frontiers, and water supplies.
A Punjab Boundary Commission had been set up to report to Sir Cyril Radcli e, with
four judges – two Muslims, a Hindu and a Sikh. These judges were given no mandate to
negotiate with political leaders or other interested parties, which might have been
supposed to be their most crucial function. Instead, they simply heard the cases
presented, and then predictably divided in two when it came to the judgement – the
Muslims sticking together, and the Sikh siding with the Hindu. Radcli e was left to
consider these inconclusive verdicts, and consequently had no choice but to make the
decision of where to draw the dividing line entirely according to his own opinions.
Su ering terribly from the heat, he was left alone with a secretary in a bungalow in the
grounds of the Viceroy’s House, amid daunting piles of maps, submissions and reports.
He was not supposed to speak to any of the Indian leaders about his work, including the
Viceroy; perhaps blessedly, he enjoyed a complete ignorance of Indian politics, and had
never previously been east of Gibraltar.13 He later admitted that it would have taken
two years to draw up a just partition.14 The Governor of the Punjab, Evan Jenkins, told
Mountbatten it would have taken twice that to partition it peacefully.15 Radcli e had
forty days.
In 1556, aged fourteen, Akbar had been crowned emperor at Gurdaspur.16 In 1947, its
signi cance was that it provided the only useful land-link between India and Kashmir.
Further east along the Indo-Kashmiri border, the Himalayas rose so high as to prohibit a
readily navigable route. Mountbatten has been accused of interfering with the decision
on Gurdaspur, and certainly its fate had worried Nehru.17 Most of it did eventually go to
India, but there is good reason to think it would have done so anyway. As early as
February 1946, when Lord Wavell had drawn up an estimate for what might constitute
Pakistan, he had insisted that Gurdaspur must be kept with Amritsar. If it were not,
Amritsar would be encircled to the east, west and north by Pakistan, rendering the Sikh
position untenable. This would have proved a decisive factor in the apportioning of
Gurdaspur regardless of the road link to Kashmir.18 On that basis, Mountbatten’s
innocence of the charge of interfering with Gurdaspur is credible, though not proven
beyond doubt.
The case of Ferozepur entails a lot more doubt, and a lot less innocence. Ferozepur
was a narrowly Muslim-majority district running along the south bank of the Sutlej
River, with a population of over half a million people. It included a major arsenal as
well as the headwaters that irrigated the princely state of Bikaner. A salient within it,
sticking out forty miles into Sikh lands and e ectively encircling Amritsar to the south,
had been assigned to Pakistan.19 This can be seen from a provisional map sent from
Mountbatten’s private secretary, George Abell, to Evan Jenkins on 8 August. The map

showed the approximate border, which was to be nalized the next day. ‘There will not
be any great changes from this boundary’, Abell wrote.20 But the Ferozepur salient was
of evident concern to Bikaner, which had already agreed to go to India. Kanwar Sain,
the Chief Engineer of Bikaner, said that he and his Prime Minister visited Mountbatten
on 11 August. They told him that, if the Ferozepur headwaters went to Pakistan, so too
would their state.21
Mountbatten did not respond to this threat, though Sain remembered that his face
changed colour; but apparently he took it seriously. Late that night, Radcli e received a
visitation in the suave form of V.P. Menon, who invited him to lunch with Mountbatten
and Lord Ismay the next day. Christopher Beaumont, secretary to the Boundary
Commission, was unusually excluded from the invitation. Beaumont later testi ed that
Radcli e returned from that lunch ‘agitated’, would not disclose what was said, and
immediately redrew the line of partition to award Ferozepur to India. Both Beaumont
and one of Mountbatten’s secretaries thought that the Viceroy was under pressure from
Nehru as well as from Bikaner to make Radcli e change the line. Evan Jenkins received
a telegram bearing the two words: ‘eliminate salient’.22
Throughout the rest of his life, Mountbatten kept up the position that he had never
interfered with Radcli e. This was a lie, as he himself allowed in at least one private
letter. Mountbatten wrote to Ismay in April 1948, with the instruction that he should
burn the letter. It survived, and provides a potentially less dishonest Mountbatten side
of the story. Radcli e, he says, came to him with the Ferozepur problem, and
Mountbatten hinted that it would be ne to ‘make any adjustments necessary’ – with the
caveat that, owing to the di culty presented by the Sikh population in the Punjab, he
would prefer any concession to Pakistan to be made in Bengal.23
Mountbatten’s account to Ismay still does not tie up entirely with Beaumont’s
testimony, which attributes the raising of the subject very clearly to Mountbatten rather
than to Radcli e. There is no reason to assume he was telling the whole truth to Ismay.
But, even if he was, the other side of the bargain presented to Radcliffe was not fulfilled:
there was no matching concession to Pakistan in Bengal. Mountbatten’s o cial
biographer has suggested that the award of the Chittagong Hill Tracts in Bengal to
Pakistan compensated for Ferozepur.24 But the award of Chittagong was supposed to
make up for Pakistan’s loss of a far greater prize: Calcutta.
Back in March, when Mountbatten’s principal secretary had expressed the opinion
that ‘Pakistan would de nitely be unworkable without Calcutta’, Mountbatten had
proposed that Chittagong might do as a port instead.25 But Chittagong was far smaller
than Calcutta, nowhere near as developed, and much less convenient for overland
transport. Muslim-majority East Bengal was mainly agricultural, with a strong jute
farming industry. But all the actual manufacturing and heavy industry was based in
Hindu-majority West Bengal. The Governor, Sir Frederick Burrows, had predicted that
an independent East Bengal without Calcutta would become a ‘rural slum’. It was felt
among Muslims that partition of Bengal was a way of sabotaging East Pakistan.
Mountbatten agreed. During the meeting, he made it clear several times that the whole
point of the current policy was to allow Pakistan ‘to fail on its demerits’. If the plan

presented to Jinnah was awful enough, the British thought, he could be made to
reconsider the whole idea of Pakistan.26 They were wrong; Jinnah would surprise them
by accepting Pakistan anyway.
On 26 April, Mountbatten asked Jinnah how he would feel if Bengal, as a whole,
became independent rather than joining Pakistan. Jinnah replied unhesitatingly: ‘I
should be delighted. What is the use of Bengal without Calcutta; they had much better
remain united and independent; I am sure that they would remain on friendly terms
with us.’27 Congress, on the other hand, was under no circumstance prepared to
countenance a fully independent Bengal, and the Muslim League in East Bengal was
under no circumstance prepared to join India. What was created, then, in East Bengal,
soon to be East Pakistan and afterwards Bangladesh, was a nation deliberately designed
to be incapable of supporting itself. At least one half of Pakistan was set up to fail.
Even the poor sop of Chittagong for Calcutta threw Congress into a frenzy. This was
predicated on the grounds that the Chittagong Hills had a non-Muslim majority: most of
the inhabitants were Buddhist or Animist. On 13 August, two days before the transfer of
power, Patel wrote to Mountbatten deploring the probable award of the Chittagong
tracts to Pakistan as ‘manifestly unjust’.28 The letter insinuated that not only might the
people of Bengal resist the award of Chittagong to Pakistan by force, but that they
would be justi ed in doing so; and that the Indian government would have to support
them, both morally and militarily.
Mountbatten was furious with Patel: ‘The one man I had regarded as a real statesman
with both feet rmly on the ground, and a man of honour whose word was his bond,
had turned out to be as hysterical as the rest.’29 The plain fact was that, even with
Chittagong taken into account, India had done much better out of the partition of
Bengal than had Pakistan. East Pakistan was also to be deprived on its north side of the
high ground claimed by the Muslim League, which would have included the hill station
of Darjeeling. There were sound arguments of geography, trade and communications for
including most of the north districts between East Bengal and the borders of Bhutan and
Nepal in Pakistan. These had been clear during the earlier partition of Bengal in 1905,
when they had been included in the east. But for the partition of 1947 such concerns as
geography, trade and communications had to be subordinated beneath religious
identity, and the religious identity of the northern part of East Bengal was, in the main,
non-Muslim. It went to India, creating a tight corridor across the Himalayas between
West Bengal and Assam, around the back of East Pakistan.
There was some debate among Mountbatten’s sta over when Radcli e’s award
should be published. Some suggested the earliest possible point, because it would be
useful to the police and army. Others thought that, since it was bound to cause trouble,
it was best left until 14 August. Mountbatten himself, after initially asking Radcli e to
publish the award on 10 August, ultimately suggested something even more radical than
leaving it till the last minute – which was to make the announcement after
independence.30 This was technically impossible, for states could not exist without
borders.31 But Mountbatten argued that independence day itself should not be marred
by the inevitable trouble that would follow the award’s publication.32

Mountbatten saw Radcli e on 9 August and asked him to postpone the award. 33
Radcli e refused point blank. He had nished the partitions of Bengal and the Punjab,
and had almost nished partitioning Sylhet in Assam; any delay would be politically
motivated. After a great deal of viceregal persuasion, he nally conceded that all three
awards could be delivered simultaneously on 13 August. Handily, this would coincide
with Mountbatten getting on a plane to Karachi. He would not be back in Delhi until the
evening of 14 August, and the printing presses would be closed for the national
Independence Day celebrations on 15 August. The awards arrived, and were put in a
safe, where they would stay, apparently unperused, until 16 August.
Mountbatten’s personal report to London of 16 August deliberately misrepresented
these dealings. ‘It was on Tuesday, 12th August, that I was nally informed by Radcli e
that his awards would be ready by noon the following day, just too late for me to see
before leaving for Karachi,’ he averred on the o cial record. Another line in the same
report got closer to the truth: ‘It had been obvious all along that, the later we postponed
publication, the less would the inevitable odium react upon the British.’34
To Mountbatten’s expressed relief, his two most troublesome foes – Gandhi and Jinnah –
were soon to be out of his life. On 9 August, Gandhi arrived in Calcutta. He moved into
the mansion of a Muslim widow in the suburb of Belliaghatta with H.S. Suhrawardy, the
Muslim League Prime Minister of Bengal, in an attempt to restore communal harmony.
On the night of 13 August, a crowd of a thousand Hindu youths threw stones at the
house, smashed windows and shouted at Gandhi to move to Park Circus, a Muslim area
where Hindu houses lay vacant and ruined.35 ‘Gandhi has announced his decision to
spend the rest of his life in Pakistan looking after the minorities,’ Mountbatten reported
to London. ‘This will infuriate Jinnah, but will be a great relief to Congress for, as I
have said before, his in uence is largely negative or even destructive.’ 36 Verdicts outside
the Viceroy’s House were similarly bleak. ‘Mr Gandhi today is a very disappointed man
indeed,’ noted the Times of India. ‘He has lived to see his followers transgress his dearest
doctrines; his countrymen have indulged in a bloody and inhuman fratricidal war; nonviolence, khadi and many another of his principles have been swept away by the swift
current of politics. Disillusioned and disappointed, he is today perhaps the only
steadfast exponent of what is understood as Gandhism.’37
Jinnah’s parting was more cheerful. On 7 August, he had left Delhi for Karachi, ying
in the Viceroy’s silver Dakota with Fatima. He arrived at Mauripur airport, and
descended wearing a sherwani and an astrakhan cap. Cheering crowds broke through
the police cordon to greet him, and pursued him all the way to his new residence,
Government House.38 Four days later, he was formally elected President of the
constituent assembly, and delivered an extraordinary speech – so extraordinary, in fact,
that it begs the question of what his intentions had ever been in proposing the idea of
Pakistan. Some historians have put forward the notion that he may have intended it all
along as a bargaining chip; and that, when Mountbatten advanced the date of the
transfer of power and made it clear that the British were leaving, the rug was pulled

from under his feet.39
Jinnah’s speech on 11 August made it very clear that he intended Pakistan to be a
secular state. ‘You may belong to any religion or caste or creed – that has nothing to do
with the business of the State,’ he declared, guaranteeing equality in Pakistan for all
faiths and communities. He went further still: ‘In course of time all these angularities of
the majority and minority communities, the Hindu community and the Muslim
community – because even as regards Muslims you have Pathans, Punjabis, Shias,
Sunnis and so on, and among Hindus you have Brahmins, Vashnavas, Khatris, also
Bengalees, Madrasis and so on – will vanish,’ he said. ‘Indeed, if you ask me, this has
been the biggest hindrance in the way of India to attain freedom and independence, and
but for this we would have been free peoples long, long ago.’40 These were peculiar
words from the man who had long hindered independence precisely by reinforcing the
division between Hindu and Muslim, and add weight to the theory that Jinnah may
have been less serious about Pakistan as a Muslim homeland than as a playing piece.
Perhaps, all along, he had pursued not an Islamic state, but rather a non-Hindu-majority
state. There was no time to worry about it. On 13 August, an exhausted Radcli e
delivered his award; the last few princely states were still squabbling over better deals;
Gandhi, in Calcutta, tried desperately to hold Hindus and Muslims together; and Nehru,
in Delhi, began to read reports of new outbreaks of disorder in the Punjab with growing
concern. One hundred and fty people, mostly Sikhs, had been murdered there in the
previous twenty-four hours.41
That afternoon, the Mountbattens ew to Karachi for the rst of their independence
days. In the evening, the Jinnahs threw a party at Government House. There was a state
banquet, at which Fatima Jinnah and the Begum Liaquat Ali Khan teased Mountbatten
about the midnight plans for Delhi’s independence ceremonies, and remarked how
shocking it was that a government should be in thrall to the pronouncements of
astrologers. ‘I refrained from retorting that the whole Karachi programme had had to
change because Jinnah had forgotten that it was Ramazan,’ Mountbatten wrote sni ly,
‘and had had to change the lunch party he had himself suggested to a dinner party.’42
On the verandah, the band played an eclectic selection of tunes – from ‘Finlandia’ to
‘A Whistler and His Dog’ – while the guests sipped soft drinks and ate ice cream and
cakes. Jinnah, though elegant as ever, was showing the strain of the previous few
weeks. The journalist Mildred Talbot, who was present, reported that his ‘appearance so
shocked me that little else registered on my mind during the evening. I hadn’t thought it
possible but he was even more slender and a worse colour than when we had seen him
in Delhi last November. He looked like a walking, talking corpse. The nightmare I had
that night was directly attributable to that vivid impression.’43 Despite his appearance,
Jinnah was at his warmest that night. He and Mountbatten had their friendliest ever
conversation, with Jinnah thanking Mountbatten for the creation of Pakistan and for
staying on in India, and imploring him to defend Pakistan’s interests, too.44
The next morning, the Mountbattens and the Jinnahs drove to Assembly Hall in a
superannuated Rolls Royce that had been borrowed from a prince. Jinnah wore a silk
sherwani, while both Mountbattens were in their trademark dazzling white.

‘Mountbatten was looking very dashing,’ remembered one British soldier who was on
duty during the parade, ‘with an all-over, almost Chorus Girl tan.’45 All four waved and
smiled as they drove through Karachi to the piping of the Royal Highlanders.
Mountbatten do ed his cap as they passed the bronze statue of Mohandas Gandhi that
stood between the secretariat and the chief court, a gift from Karachi’s Hindu merchants,
who had threatened civil war within twenty-four hours if it were removed. Earlier that
day, someone had put an Muslim fez on it: this had tactfully disappeared by the time the
parade passed. When Mountbatten uncovered, Jinnah, too, raised his hand in an
acknowledgement of his great rival.46
At the assembly hall, the four descended from their car, which was by then so
overheated that it burst into ames. 47 Inside the hall, Mountbatten noticed that there
was only one special chair set up. He was still busy thinking that Jinnah ought to have a
special chair, too, when Jinnah sat himself down on the throne and indicated that
Mountbatten should take one of the humbler seats.48 Both men gave gracious speeches,
complimenting each other on a carefully chosen list of virtues. Edwina pressed Fatima
Jinnah’s hand with a ection as Jinnah gave his magisterial address. 49 ‘History seems
sometimes to move with the in nite slowness of a glacier and sometimes to rush
forward in a torrent,’ said Mountbatten when it was his turn to speak. ‘Just now, in this
part of the world our united e orts have melted the ice and moved some impediments in
the stream, and we are carried onwards in the full ood. There is no time to look back.
There is time only to look forward.’50 Jinnah read out the goodwill messages Pakistan
had so far received. The very rst was from one of the parties with the greatest interest
in Pakistan’s future, President Harry S. Truman of the United States of America. It was
followed by similar good wishes from Egypt, France, Syria and Nepal.51 The band
played ‘God Save the King’ before the meeting broke up. Mildred Talbot cast some doubt
on the supposed new spirit of camaraderie between Mountbatten and Jinnah. ‘If it were
in truth a “parting between friends” as they both declared,’ she wrote, ‘it was the coldest
friendship I have ever seen.’52
After the ceremony, the Mountbattens and the Jinnahs emerged into the sunlight for a
state parade. The atmosphere was reported as being one of ‘curious apathy’ – whether
this represented a general antipathy towards Pakistan, or just the fact that most of
Karachi’s population was Hindu, was not certain.53 Mountbatten had been warned the
day before by the Criminal Investigation Department of a plot to throw bombs at
Jinnah during the procession. He had tried to persuade Jinnah to cancel it, ‘but he was
in his strongest “no” mood’.54 Instead, Jinnah advised Mountbatten not to join him in
the open car; but the Viceroy would not baulk before Jinnah, and, in any case, he
thought his presence might guard against any attempt by Hindus or Sikhs. ‘I knew that
no one in that crowd would want to risk shooting me!’55 The parade went on. ‘I won’t
pretend I wasn’t scared,’ Mountbatten later admitted. ‘I was, and did my best not to
show it, but the new Governor-General of Pakistan did not seem in the least bit
frightened. I was deeply impressed by his calm courage and high sense of duty.’ The car
trundled along, Mountbatten unable to relax until the view of Government House drew
close and they arrived back through the gates. ‘Never had my feelings been warmer to

the man with whom I shared this traumatic experience’, he wrote.
Jinnah ashed Mountbatten a grin, leaned forward to touch him on the knee and
said, ‘Thank God I’ve brought you back alive.’ Mountbatten’s tension got the better of
his etiquette. ‘You brought me back alive?’ he exclaimed. ‘It’s I who brought you back
alive.’56 But the important thing, as he soon afterwards admitted, was that they had
both come back alive – and that there was a new cordiality in the air between the
Governors General of India and Pakistan. Before the Mountbattens climbed on to their
aeroplane at midday, Fatima Jinnah bid them farewell. To Edwina’s surprise, she kissed
her goodbye a ectionately on both cheeks. 57 But the cheerful mood sobered as the
Viceroy’s plane ew over the Punjab boundaries on its way back to Delhi, the large res
of villages a ame clearly visible from the air. 58 In the villages of the Punjab, the
beginnings of the partition disaster were already underway.
‘My warmest thanks to you on this day which sees the successful achievement of a
task of an unexampled di culty’, Attlee cabled to Mountbatten that night – adding a
special thanks to Edwina. Mountbatten replied delightedly that it was ‘the most
encouraging telegram I have ever received’.59 He communicated Attlee’s thanks to
Edwina in a heartfelt letter, perhaps intending to rebuild the relationship after the
storms of the previous weeks: ‘surely no husband in history has had the proud privilege
of transmitting a telegram of appreciation from the Prime Minister to his wife’, he
wrote. ‘I’m proud to be that exception.’ He concluded with an appreciation of his own:
‘Thank you, my pet, with all my heart.’60
In Delhi, the bunting was going up, and a joyful atmosphere prevailed. On every
street, workmen climbed sca olding to repaint walls and hang banners, wiring
thousands of orange, white and green lightbulbs around trees and fences, swagging
them across the roads. In the great shopping arcades of Connaught Circus, the national
ag hung in every window. Drapers lled their windows with bales of silk in the
national colours; restaurants o ered special independence menus; cinemas proclaimed
free shows of Indian movies for students and children. Gentlemen’s out tters sold out of
sherwanis: according to the Times of India, ‘An Indian dressed in a western suit is
already beginning to feel self-conscious.’
In the cramped, ancient alleys of Old Delhi, steam billowed forth from vats of boiling
milk, lling the air with the delicate scents of rosewater and cardamom as the city’s
confectioners toiled to meet endless orders for sweets. The heavy rationing of sugar was
not permitted to spoil the fun: ‘the blackmarketeer is having the time of his life,
combining patriotism with business.’61 Nehru gave a splendid speech to a huge crowd,
undiminished by the sheeting monsoon rain. ‘I felt happy at coming into close personal
contact with great crowds again’, he wrote to his sister, Nan, who had left for her
ambassadorial posting in Moscow a few days before. ‘I still seem to appeal to them.’62
He was thrilled to see the ags unfurling all over the capital, stamping a new Indian
identity on the British city. ‘You do think they’re really going, don’t you,’ a respected
political analyst asked an American journalist; ‘this is not just a subterfuge so they can
come back when their crisis at home is over?’63 But they were going. As the chimes
sounded and the unexpected blast from a conch shell startled the delegates in the

chamber of the Constituent Assembly, a nation that had struggled for so many years,
and sacrificed so much, was freed at last from the shackles of Empire.
Yes, Britain was finally free.
By the following morning the world had turned once, and changed for ever. India and
Pakistan were dominions. Britain had surrendered the keystone of its Empire. And yet at
8.30 sharp the Mountbattens were once again sitting on gold and scarlet thrones in New
Delhi’s majestic Durbar Hall. Lord Mountbatten, resplendent in a uniform, was saluted
by trumpet fanfares from the upper gallery. Meanwhile, according to Mildred Talbot:
‘Probably every woman present marveled at the cool appearance of Lady Mountbatten
who, in the midst of Delhi’s indescribable summer heat, was stunning in gold lamé, armlength gloves, and the appropriate jewelry including a gold tiara.’64
This almost monarchical ceremony installed Mountbatten in his new democratic role
as Governor General of India. For, though there had been a revolution, the Empire had
not been overthrown. The British had got away with their dignity intact, and their
majesty undimmed. The Mountbattens drove to the Council House for an inaugural
meeting, at which Lord Mountbatten read out a message to India from his cousin, King
George VI. ‘Freedom-loving people everywhere will wish to share in your celebrations,’
the King had written, ‘for with this transfer of power by consent comes the ful lment of
a great democratic ideal to which the British and Indian peoples alike are rmly
dedicated.’65 An overdue retreat had been turned into a great British victory.
No cynicism blighted the mass celebrations that day. While the dignitaries of the
Constituent Assembly delivered their speeches in the Council Chamber, the Indian
tricolour was raised above the building for the rst time. For a few minutes, there was
silence along the grand avenue of Kingsway, as the hundreds of thousands assembled
(some on roofs, or hanging out of trees) took in the long-wished-for sight. But a gradual
rumbling soon swelled into a cheer, which was renewed as Nehru came out on to the
balcony. When the Mountbattens emerged, another shout of approval went up. Before
he and his wife got into their state coach, Lord Mountbatten, knowing exactly how to
serve the moment, turned and saluted both his friend Nehru and the Indian flag.
After lunch and a quick change, the Mountbattens were driven in a parade down the
whole length of Kingsway to India Gate, through streets so packed with crowds that they
were unable to get out of their coach. In the blistering heat of that afternoon, Princes’
Park was crammed with hundreds of thousands of free Indians. The park was a
monument to royalty, with a colossal statue of King George V in a pagoda at the centre,
and the palaces of ve of India’s most magni cent princes arranged in a circle around
it: the Nizam of Hyderabad, the Gaekwar of Baroda, and the Maharajas of Patiala,
Bikaner and Jaipur. On Independence Day, it brimmed with ordinary people. Where
30,000 had been expected, at least ten times that number turned up: some estimates said
as many as a million. An instant democracy blossomed, as peasant crowds stormed the
grandstand which had been reserved for dignitaries, and cheerfully occupied it six to a
chair.66 The crush was such that people could not lift a foot for fear they would never

get it back to the ground. The Mountbattens’ daughter Pamela remembered that ‘it was
raining babies! Because lots of women had brought their babies with them and they
were being crushed. So they threw them up in the air in despair of having these babies
crushed, and you just sort of caught a baby as it came down.’67 Nehru’s daughter, Indira
Gandhi, saw one woman decide that her baby was probably safer with Lady
Mountbatten, and pass it over. Edwina held the infant tightly in her arms.68
Pamela was with Vallabhbhai Patel’s daughter, Maniben. Maniben was a tiny, fragilelooking woman, and Pamela began to fear seriously for her life as the crowd squeezed
tighter. They were rescued by Nehru, who created a distraction by lifting o a nearby
Indian’s topee and bashing another on the head with it. He climbed up on to a man’s
shoulders, and surfed forwards over the shoulders of the crowd towards them. ‘Panditji
came galloping over people, wearing sandals,’ Pamela remembered. Nehru pulled them
towards the flag platform, which would provide something to stand against.
‘Where do I put my feet?’ asked Pamela. ‘I cannot walk on people.’
‘Of course you can walk on people,’ he replied. ‘Nobody will mind.’ Pamela indicated
her high-heeled shoes, at which he added, ‘Well, take those shoes o then nobody will
mind.’
‘And we walked over human bodies the whole way,’ remembered Pamela, ‘and the
extraordinary thing about that day was that nobody did mind.’69
Taken aback, Mountbatten and Nehru decided to abandon the carefully planned
programme of ceremonial. Instead, the Governor General simply shouted from his
carriage that the new Indian ag should be hoisted up, as he pulled fainting children out
of the crowd and into safety. The new Indian tricolour unfurled to a chorus of joyous
uproar. (The British ag was not hauled down rst. Mountbatten had seen to it that all
Union Jacks had been removed the night before.)70 As a salute was red, a rainbow
broke across the sky – a detail that one would dismiss as fanciful, were it not for the fact
that so many observers insisted they had seen it.71 Mountbatten pointed up at this welltimed natural phenomenon, and the crowd went wild again. ‘I had never noticed how
closely a rainbow could resemble the new Dominion ag of sa ron, white and green,’
he mused in his report to the British government the next day.72
The rest of the day was taken up with parties, speeches and almost impossible
progressions through the undiminishing throngs in the streets. The Mountbattens’ coach
was besieged as it returned to the Viceroy’s House (renamed Government House for the
new era). As the coach trawled through the crowds, it picked up several stowaways.
Four Indian ladies and their children crammed inside next to the Mountbattens, along
with the Polish wife of a British o cer. An Indian press photographer clung to the back.
Nehru himself, unable to get to his car, sat cross-legged on the hood. The photographer
was particularly struck by the people’s reaction to the Mountbattens, as they shouted
out, ‘Pandit Mountbatten ki jai!’ (‘Hail Mountbatten!’) The next day, he was moved to
tell Mountbatten’s press attaché: ‘At last, after two hundred years, Britain has conquered
India.’73

PART III
THE BEGINNING

CHAPTER 15: PARADISE ON EARTH

and Pakistan were dominions within the British
WHAT HAD BEEN ONE WAS NOT NOW TWO, BUT LEGION. INDIA
Commonwealth of Nations. Hyderabad, Kashmir, Bhopal, Indore, Kalat and Junagadh
were of uncertain status, having refused to accede to either dominion, though Bhopal
and Indore would soon accede to India, and Kalat ultimately to Pakistan. Owing to
Jinnah’s laid-back policy, none of the ten princely states which were expected to go to
Pakistan had acceded; British paramountcy was gone, and theoretically any of these
could be recognized as independent nations. Even so, by the morning of 15 August,
India was by population the second largest country in the world. On its eastern and
western edges, the two chunks of Pakistan comprised the sixth largest country in the
world. East and West Pakistan were separated by at least 725 miles of Indian territory,
or a twenty-day journey by steamship around the edge. There was a good deal of bad
feeling between India and Pakistan, and no borders – at least, none known to any but
Sir Cyril Radcli e and his secretary, for still the maps lay locked up on Mountbatten’s
orders in a safe in Government House. In London, a Ministry of Works carpenter in a
white apron and a Homburg hat briskly unscrewed the plaque to the left of the door on
King Charles Street that read ‘India O ce’, and replaced it with a new one:
‘Commonwealth Relations Office’.1
On the morning of 16 August, Jawaharlal Nehru closed the celebrations, and hoisted
the Indian tricolour over the Red Fort in Old Delhi, the splendid palace of Shah Jahan,
grandson of Akbar. Half a million people crowded into the wide street around the fort,
whose red sandstone towers had been the setting for generations of potentates. The
great Mughals had shown their majesty from its ramparts at daybreak every morning.
The last Mughal, Bahadur Shah II, had brie y ruled the Indian mutineers from its
pillared halls. King George V, in plumes and medals, had ridden forth from it for his
coronation as Emperor of India in 1911. Now it was the turn of a man who hoped to
represent democratic India. Over the archway leading into the audience hall of the fort,
its ornate white marble walls inlaid with jewels cut and polished to represent delicately
blossoming owers, a famous Persian inscription reads: ‘If there is a paradise on earth,
it is this’. The crowd agreed, cheering Nehru wholeheartedly; and Edwina Mountbatten,
standing at the Prime Minister’s side, wore an expression of unreserved joy. She had
come fresh from another ght with Dickie, this time over his acceptance of a new
earldom. Dickie wrote to his daughter Patricia that Edwina was ‘in despair’ at being
promoted from Viscountess to Countess, ‘for she disapproves so much of all these
nonsensical titles.’2
‘That the double change-over occurred amid widespread rejoicings and peaceful
demonstrations happily confounds the Jeremiahs who foresaw trouble’, read the Times

of India’s con dent editorial.3 It spoke too soon. Nehru’s speech from the Red Fort was
the last happy moment of the transfer of power. That afternoon, Mountbatten handed
Radcli e’s nished award to the leaders in Delhi, and cabled it to their counterparts in
Karachi. ‘Nobody in India will love me for my award about the Punjab and Bengal’,
Radcli e had written bluntly to his stepson three days earlier, ‘and there will be roughly
80 million people with a grievance who will begin looking for me. I do not want them
to nd me.’4 He had the good sense to get on a plane to London on 17 August, and
afterwards burnt all his papers relating to the partition.5
It was inevitable that none of the parties would be happy, which was why
Mountbatten had secured on 22 July an agreement from both governments-to-be that
they would accept the award, whatever it was. They did so without pleasure. In
Pakistan, the Communications Minister, Abdur Rab Nishtar, described the award as ‘the
parting kick of the British’,6 while Liaquat was livid at the loss of Gurdaspur. In India,
the reaction was no less grim. ‘Bhai [brother] and the other Congress leaders read it
with deepening misery’, wrote Nehru’s sister, Betty Hutheesing.7 Patel could not contain
his rage at the award of the Chittagong Hill Tracts to Pakistan. But it was the Sikh
minister Baldev Singh’s wordless dejection that augured the worst for the trouble to
come.8 The Sikh population that he represented, scattered between West Pakistan and
India, received the news hardest of all. The inclusion of the western Punjab and Lahore
in Pakistan provoked an immediate response. A wave of violence, familiar in its intent
but renewed in its vigour, spilled forth across the Punjab.
When Mountbatten had still been thrashing out the details of his plan, Gandhi had
told him that there were two alternatives. Either British rule would be continued, or else
there would be a bloodbath. ‘What should I do, then?’ Mountbatten had asked. Gandhi’s
reply was typical. ‘You must face the bloodbath and accept it.’9
The bloodbath would have to be faced with an immediacy and on a scale that shocked
all the governments involved. Within hours of independence, the Punjab, which had
been disturbed for several days, su ered a total collapse of public order. Penderel Moon
was in Lahore in 15 August and found it mainly deserted or on re. While he was
discussing the situation in broad daylight with another British o cial, a gang of
Muslims broke into a Hindu house across the street and plundered it. The o cial told
him that the Muslim police had been siding with the mob, to the extent of o ering
armed cover from the roofs while Muslim rioters ransacked Sikh gurdwaras.10 On the
afternoon of 16 August Sir Claude Auchinleck, now Supreme Commander of the Indian
and Pakistani armies, reported to Mountbatten that the new dominion of India was
already in a state of civil war.
Less than a month before, the future governments of India and Pakistan had issued a
joint declaration insisting that ‘in no circumstances will violence be tolerated’. There
can be no doubt that the governments were genuine in their intention to preserve order,
just as there can be no doubt that they had neither the imagination nor the capacity to
do so. It had been believed, fancifully but rmly, that the local police and General
Rees’s Boundary Force would be able to take care of any spots of bother.11 But the
extent and vigour of communal tensions had been catastrophically underestimated.

On 17 August, Nehru dropped everything and ew to the Punjab to meet Liaquat. Side
by side, the two men appealed for peace through public appearances and broadcasts.
Meanwhile, Lord and Lady Mountbatten ew to Bombay to see o the rst contingent
of British troops, and to celebrate all over again. By the shores of the Arabian Sea, on
Bombay’s Ballard Pier, Mountbatten asked the 5000 men to break ranks and cluster
around, just as he had so often in Burma during the war. He made a jovial speech, and
had a message of good wishes from Nehru read out.
Dickie and Edwina proceeded to a tea party at the Taj Mahal Hotel, and afterwards
drove to Government House. The drive, just ve miles around Back Bay, took almost an
hour owing to the number of people lining the route – the Bombay police estimated
750,000.12 The Indian tricolour was waved all day by Lady Mountbatten and the crowds
alike; they also waved the Union Jack. Just eighteen months before, remembered the
journalist Phillips Talbot, the naval mutineers in Bombay had roused great crowds with
cries of ‘Death to Englishmen!’ and ‘Britishers: Go Back!’ Now the cry was ‘Jai England!’
and ‘England zindabad!’13 ‘A senior British o cial was misty-eyed when he told me
about it later,’ Talbot noted.14 Police cordons were broken as crowds swarmed the car.
Dickie was overjoyed, and shouted ‘Jai Hind!’ all the way along Marine Drive. People
climbed on to the footboard of his carriage to touch the hems of his gleaming naval
whites, and he was ‘literally caressed for hundreds of yards by rapt admirers’, according
to the Times of India.15
Dickie returned to Delhi, while Edwina stayed in Bombay to visit her usual round of
worthy institutions. It was the cheerful photographs of her kneeling on the oor to play
with the happy, healthy children at the United Mills Welfare Centre that made it into
the o cial album of the trip; but the grimmer scenes at the Matunga labour camp and
the lthy slum area made a greater impact on her personally. Edwina trudged for hours
around the grim hovels in which many thousands of the city’s poor lived, and was
quoted in the newspapers describing the conditions as ‘appalling’.16 But the press
baulked at reporting the full force of her comments, which decried the slums as a
‘constant reproach to the citizens of the great and wealthy city of Bombay’, and called
on those citizens to wipe out this shame. The reception she received from the locals was
one of rapturous approval.17
Edwina arrived back in Delhi on 19 August. In the four days since partition, the
Punjab had been reduced to open anarchy. Seventy thousand Muslims from India had
already arrived in Lahore. The Pakistani government opened camps for 40,000, but the
rest were obliged to fend for themselves. Meanwhile, Hindus and Sikhs ed the city. In
April 1947, the Hindu and Sikh population of Lahore had been estimated at 300,000. It
was now, just four months later, barely 10,000.18 In Amritsar, on the Indian side of the
border, a large group of Muslim women was stripped naked, paraded through the streets
and raped by a Sikh mob. Some Sikhs were able to rescue a few of the women and hide
them in the Golden Temple until the army could arrive. The rest of the women were
burnt alive.19 Murders were running at several hundred a day, and a bon re had been
made of Muslim houses. The police on both sides either stood by or, in many cases,
joined in. The phrase ‘a thousand times more horrible than anything I saw during the

war’ became a cliché among British and Indian o cers. One o cer was confronted with
the sight of four babies that had been roasted to death over a fire.20
A strong desire for revenge following the massacres of Sikhs by Muslims in March
meant that the Sikh campaign was being organized with striking e ciency, recruiting
and mobilizing ex-servicemen and arming them from private stockpiles. Groups of
anywhere between 20 and 5000 men (and sometimes women and children) would meet
in gurdwaras and organize themselves into jathas, or ghting mobs, to raze Muslim
villages. They were well armed with machine guns, ri es and shotguns, as well as
grenades, spears, axes and kirpans, the ceremonial blade carried by all Sikhs.21 Usually,
their Muslim adversaries only had staves. The pattern of attack was well established.
When Muslim villagers saw a jatha coming, they would climb on to their roofs and beat
gongs to alert neighbouring villages. The Sikhs would send in a rst wave to shoot them
o the roofs, a second wave to lob grenades over the walls, and a third wave to cut
survivors to pieces with kirpans and spears. A fourth wave of older men would then go
in and set light to the village, while outriders would ride around, swinging their kirpans
to fell any escapees.
Retaliation against these atrocities was swift and furious. On 23 August a train full of
Sikh refugees was attacked by Muslims at Ferozepur, leaving 25 dead and 100 wounded.
In Quetta, riots kicked o between Muslim League supporters and Pathans. After three
boys were paraded through the streets, bearing injuries sustained from riots in West
Punjab, both sides turned on the local Hindus.22 One week after partition, Delhi was a
temporary home to 130,000 Muslim refugees on their way to Pakistan, a quarter of
whom had arrived in the preceding fortnight. Five thousand were crowded into a squalid
refugee camp in front of the Jama Masjid; sixteen other camps were set up to host the
rest.23 Inside these enclaves, according to Lord Ismay, ‘conditions de ed description’:
there was no water, no food, no sanitation and no security.24
Mountbatten has been widely held responsible for the scale of the partition disaster,
and for the failure to deal with it once it started. For his management of the situation,
according to his ercest critic, Andrew Roberts, ‘Mountbatten deserved to be courtmartialled on his return to London.’25 This is a serious accusation, and worth examining
in some detail. The criticism has been aimed from three angles. First, Mountbatten is
accused of ignoring the speci c problem of the Sikhs, who were particularly disgruntled
by their lot under his plan, and capable of organizing their disgruntlement into military
action. Second, he is accused of failing to use British troops to stop the trouble once it
started. Third, he is accused of having rushed through the whole transfer of power so
fast that preparations made for the effects of partition were either inadequate or absent.
On the matter of the Sikhs, Mountbatten had long been alerted. During his very rst
week in India, he had asked V.P. Menon for an assessment of the Sikh situation.26 He
had had extensive contact with the moderate Sikh Minister of Defence, Baldev Singh; he
had also spoken to the more militant Akali Dal leaders, Tara Singh and Kartar Singh. He
had heard their demand for an independent Khalistan.
Khalistan was impossible, as Kartar Singh himself admitted.27 The Sikhs had a great
deal of land and people scattered throughout the Punjab, but they were a majority in no

part of it – and neither Hindus nor, more emphatically, Muslims would have consented
to live in a Sikh state. Inevitably, once the partition of the Punjab had been decided
upon, the Sikhs would have to be split. The only alternative would have been to leave
the Punjab intact and give it in its entirety to India or Pakistan. Pakistan was the
stronger contender, for the Punjab had over 16 million Muslims against fewer than 8
million Hindus and 4 million Sikhs, and a strong Muslim League presence in its
government.28 But without any rm word on their security or freedom of conscience the
Sikhs were reluctant to enter into an Islamic nation.29 Several Punjabi Sikh groups
threatened civil war if they were forced into Pakistan.
Mountbatten had been warned that the Sikhs would object to their deal before
partition. Liaquat repeatedly asked him to imprison Sikh leaders and to ban the
kirpan.30 Mountbatten did not, and this has often been used to hold him responsible for
Sikh involvement in the massacres.31 But he had only refrained from acting, on the
advice of senior neutral experts. On 5 August, Mountbatten had a secret meeting with
Patel, Jinnah and Liaquat, which directly implicated the Sikh leaders in a number of
plots – including that to assassinate Jinnah in Karachi on 14 August. Jinnah and Liaquat
again demanded the arrest of Tara Singh and his associates, but Patel warned that this
would make the situation worse. Mountbatten did not take Patel’s word for it, but wrote
to Evan Jenkins, Governor of the Punjab, and his two successors, Sir Chandulal Trivedi
and Sir Francis Mudie, to ask them for their opinion. All three were rm and unanimous
in their accord with Patel.32
Had Mountbatten imprisoned the likes of Tara Singh and Kartar Singh for crimes they
had not yet committed, and had he banned the kirpan, he would have faced a
tremendous backlash from the Sikhs before the transfer of power. This was exactly
opposite to Britain’s interests, and therefore he could not do it. Even if he had
imprisoned the leaders, it is unlikely that the Sikhs would have been paci ed. From the
character of the ghting during August and September 1947, it was obvious that they had
created an organized militia. Had Tara Singh and Kartar Singh been removed, more
heads would have sprung up to replace them. As Nehru wrote afterwards, ‘It is just
childish nonsense or deliberate malice for anyone to contend that [the] arrest of Tara
Singh or a few others could have made any di erence to a vast explosive situation.’
Nehru also noted another point, too often ignored, that ‘The charges are based on
premises that the Sikhs were originators of and guilty party in all that happened,’
premises which he described as ‘completely wrong’.33 Mountbatten did exactly as he was
advised by his governors and sta : he duly reported the Sikh problem to London – which
did not volunteer any extra reinforcements – and set up the Punjab Boundary Force with
it in mind.34 Without hindsight, it is hard to see that he could have done more.
Mountbatten has also been charged with not deploying more British soldiers to
maintain order, and to guarantee safe conduct for refugees between the two
dominions.35 To a great extent, this would have been the responsibility of the Ministry
of War, the Ministry of Air, and the Admiralty, rather than Mountbatten, but it is true
that he did not bother those ministries for reinforcements.36 Had British troops been

used, he argued, ‘They would doubtless have incurred the odium of both sides.’37 As it
was, the Punjab Boundary Force was widely seen as being an arm of British
imperialism.
After 15 August, Mountbatten was the servant of the Union of India; and his Prime
Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, had made unequivocal his opinion: ‘I would rather have
every village in India go up in ames than keep a single British soldier in India a
moment longer than necessary.’38 Mountbatten’s sta agreed with Nehru. When the
Governor General showed an inclination to send a British brigade to police Delhi,
Auchinleck argued that British troops could only be used to protect British lives.39 British
services were overstretched, and commanders had been pointing out for at least a year
that the release of soldiers from India was a high priority: India was no longer relevant
to British defence.40 Field Marshal Montgomery had visited Delhi in June, and met
Nehru, to whom he expressed his desire to withdraw all British troops as fast as possible.
‘He asked me if there was any chance of our changing our minds later and asking some
British troops to be left in India,’ noted Nehru. ‘If this happened it would upset his
programme. I told him that there was not the least chance of this happening and we
wanted British troops in India to be taken away completely.’41 The situation was
unambiguous: the British government, the British services and the Indian government all
insisted that British troops should be removed from India at the earliest possible
opportunity. It is fanciful to imagine that Mountbatten could have acted in direct
contradiction of the wishes of all three of these bodies.
Finally, there is the question of whether Mountbatten’s extraordinary rush to transfer
power caused the disaster. Undoubtedly, Mountbatten went much faster than anyone
asked him to. But the arguments against Mountbatten’s speed all rely on a mistaken
assumption: that, if the Viceroy had stuck to Attlee’s timetable, he would have had the
time and resources to subdue the Punjab. He had neither. Attlee had made it clear that
Britain was going to leave India regardless of its situation in June 1948. Once this had
been stated, even a dramatic show of force against rioters could only have postponed
the violence until then. There is no reason to think that the slow-boiling of communal
tempers under martial law for an extra nine months would have reconciled everybody
to live happily ever after. There is every reason to think that the result would have been
just as bad, if not worse.42 Chakravarty Rajagopalachari, who would the following year
take over from Mountbatten as Governor General of India, was one of many who
expressed this view. ‘If the Viceroy had not transferred power when he did’, he wrote,
‘there could well have been no power to transfer.’43
For Britain to impose martial law would have put the governments in Delhi and in
London in a dubious situation. In the rst place, there was no appetite in Britain for
further British casualties in foreign wars. Only seven British o cers were killed in India
between partition and the end of January 1948; had the British Army taken full
responsibility, it is logical to suppose that there would have been many more.44 In the
second place, had Mountbatten cracked down hard on the Punjab before 15 August, he
would have caused untold trouble both inside India and with Britain’s international
allies, especially the United States. Assertions of British dominance were neither

desirable nor practical. They risked antagonizing the Indian people and politicians
further, and spreading serious discontent from the Punjab to other parts of India – an
e ect that was already visible from sympathy riots in the North-West Frontier Province.
Neither Britain nor India needed in the middle of 1947 to risk any more Brigadier
General Dyers carrying out any more Amritsar massacres.
But most important of all was the issue of resources. The British government was in
the middle of its worst nancial crisis since the Great Depression. There was very little
popular understanding of what was going on in the Punjab, and even less interest. The
British had recently emerged from six years of war. Hundreds of thousands had been
killed, and millions expended. Their normal industries had been battered, their towns
destroyed, their families broken up and stuck back together. Still they languished under
the strictures of rationing, which were getting tighter, not looser. To these ordinary
people, the Empire was a super uous accoutrement. Edie Rutherford, a forty-three-yearold housewife from She eld, had a typically indi erent reaction to the mass of press
coverage about the e ective end of her nation’s Empire and the independence of 400
million of her fellow subjects. ‘I swear most folk couldn’t care less’, she wrote in her
diary on 16 August 1947, ‘and I resent the inference that we have had them enslaved up
to now. Most folk are simply glad to be shot of them, to put it vulgarly yet truthfully.’45
Churchill’s warnings about indignant Britons awakening sharply to defend their Empire
came to nothing. Even he himself had relented. ‘I do not think we shall lose very much
by leaving India at the present time, and that feeling is undoubtedly widespread here,’
he had mused in an unsent letter to Jinnah.46
Mountbatten’s early withdrawal might not have allowed su cient time for the Indian
and Pakistani governments or armies to get their acts together, but it did a service to
Britain – whose interests, after all, he had been employed to serve. It has been argued
that the British government should have felt a responsibility for the millions of Punjabis
who were, after all, British subjects until August 1947. In moral terms, probably it
should have. But in practical terms it felt a lot more responsibility for the millions of
British subjects who lived in Britain itself, to whom it would still be accountable after 15
August. Faced with a choice between abandoning a nation a very long way away, and
antagonizing the nation on its doorstep, the government chose the former. The decision
may not have been a happy one, but no government in that position could have
behaved differently.
On all three counts for which Roberts would have had Mountbatten court-martialled –
the mishandling of the Sikhs, the lack of British Army support, and the speed of the
transfer of power – there is a strong case in his defence. As Viceroy, Mountbatten was
charged with serving the interests of Britain. He did this rigorously. Naturally, his focus
on British interests meant that both India and Pakistan were ill-served by his viceroyalty
– but that was inevitable. Moreover, for all his later boasts that Attlee had granted him
‘plenipotentiary powers’, Mountbatten’s hands were tied by what London would give
him.47 He could not magic soldiers out of thin air.
From Mountbatten’s point of view, the greatest mistake was staying on as Governor
General of independent India. At the stroke of midnight on the morning of 15 August

1947, he had been transformed from a servant of British interests to a servant of Indian
interests. The best interests of Britain had been served by a swift exit, a slapdash
partition, the creation of Pakistan, and the repatriation of British armed forces. The best
interests of India might well have been served by exactly the opposite. After 15 August,
Mountbatten was in the unenviable position of having to deal with a combusting and
hamstrung India that had been left that way by his own successful management of his
previous job. He had been deeply reluctant to accept the governor-generalship, but had
had little choice under pressure from his king, government and opposition. From his
point of view, though, his reputation would have endured far better had he been on his
plane heading for London alongside Sir Cyril Radcliffe.
Ten days after the transfer of power, the scale and awfulness of what was underway
had still not been realized in Delhi. ‘We are only just alive’, wrote Edwina to her friend
Kay Norton, ‘but the last gruelling ve months have been well worth while after all the
incredible happenings and demonstrations of the last 10 days.’ She expressed the hope
that the refugee situation would soon be resolved.48 In the days after writing those
words, both she and Jawaharlal Nehru visited the Punjab, and the grim truth began to
sink in.
In 1946, Nehru had made three predictions to journalist Jacques Marcuse. ‘One, India
will never be a Dominion. Two, there will never be a Pakistan. Three, when the British
go, there will be no more communal trouble in India.’ Marcuse was back in Delhi just
after partition to interview him again, but could not bring himself to remind Nehru of
their previous conversation. In the end, Nehru brought it up himself. ‘You remember,
Marcuse, what I told you? No Dominion, No Pakistan, No …’
Both men were silent for a moment, until Nehru added wistfully, ‘Wasn’t I wrong?’49
On 24 August, he set out at six o’clock in the morning in an aeroplane for the Punjabi
town of Jullundur, and spent hours travelling by car and jeep across the dusty plains.
He emerged to walk through deserted ruins which had been lively, noisy and welcoming
villages. Now there was no sound, no life; just corpses, cinders, and dried-up splashes of
bloodstain in the dust. He saw a caravan of 100,000 refugees, moving despondently
away to a new land unknown. He talked to as many as he could. ‘I cannot imagine
another day when he could have felt more strongly that all his hopes, his dreams, his
faith in human nature were crashing down in pieces,’ remembered his secretary, H.V.R.
Iengar. Finally, he made it to bed at two o’clock the next morning, before getting up at
half-past ve to y to Lahore. The passengers on the plane slumped back in their seats,
exhausted and miserable; except for Nehru, who was engrossed in reading a slim
volume. Iengar asked him what it was. He explained that it was a Sanskrit play:
Mrcchakatika, or The Little Clay Cart.50 It is the witty and scandalous story of a hero,
Charudatta, ‘the tree of plenty to the poor’, ‘a treasure of manly virtues, intelligent,
liberal, and upright’, who has given up his hereditary riches to the people. Charudatta
falls in love with a spirited, bold and compassionate woman, Vasantasena. But
Vasantasena is claimed by another man – the frivolous, hasty and foolish brother-in-law

of the King. ‘There is no changing nature,’ a character remarks; ‘nothing can keep an ox
out of a eld of corn, nor stop a man who covets another’s wife.’ In the end, Charudatta
not only wins the love of Vasantasena, but through ‘noble daring wrested an empire
from its ancient lords’.51 Much in this ancient tale must have resonated.
Two days after Nehru had set out, Edwina ew to Jullundur with her close friend and
India’s rst female cabinet minister, Amrit Kaur. She had gone after consulting Maniben
Patel, who had told her that it would be helpful to have a reliable eyewitness report on
the situation, in addition to the raising of morale her trip might e ect. 52 The local
authorities were in such disarray that no welcome party had turned up to meet Edwina
and Amrit, apart from a lost baby bu alo that had wandered on to the tarmac.
Eventually, they managed to commandeer a jeep, and toured seven refugee camps and
hospitals in Jullundur and Amritsar that rst day, distributing medical supplies and food
when they could, and making notes of what was needed after they ran out. As Edwina
came to the end of her tour, she was told of an attack on a lorryload of refugees who
had come in from Sialkot. Without hesitation, she returned to the Victoria Memorial
Hospital to visit the survivors. Afterwards, she went to see the Sikh leader, Tara Singh,
in person. According to Alan Campbell-Johnson, he was ‘at last beginning to tremble at
the wrath he has readily invoked’.53 The next morning she was o to Lahore in
Pakistan, visiting a Muslim refugee camp and a school before breakfast. She continued
through Rawalpindi, Sialkot and Gujranwalla before returning to Delhi.
The trip established Edwina’s position at the prow of the government’s relief e orts,
making her one among many visible women in senior positions in the Indian
administration. Independent India had been constituted along remarkably progressive
lines. From the outset, Indian women would earn equal pay for equal work – a right not
conferred upon British women until the 1970s. ‘A lot of people will dispute the
advisability of such a thing in this country, and it remains to be seen what will happen
here,’ Lady Mountbatten told a meeting of the East India Association in London the
following year; ‘but I am convinced that India was perfectly right to decide that there
should not be any discrimination between men and women, that every eld of service
should be open to those women who were quali ed to serve. Men and women must be
equal before the law and if that is so they must then receive equal pay for equal work.’54
But behind this image of feminist progress lay a long, dark shadow of female despair.
At Calcutta in 1946, and subsequently, the vengeance of the rioters had been wreaked
deliberately on women. As the great migrations and great slaughters following partition
got underway, so too did a sustained and brutal campaign of sexual persecution. The use
of rape as a weapon of war was conscious and emphatic. On every side, proud tales
were told of the degradation of enemy women. Thousands of women were abducted,
forcibly married to their assailants, and bundled away to the other side of the border.
Many never saw their families again. Thousands more were simply used and then
thrown back into their villages. There were accounts of women who had been held down
while their breasts and arms were cut, tattooed or branded with their rapists’ names and
the dates of their attacks.55
As if such ordeals were not horri c enough, the media and public o cials publicly

glori ed a distinctly feminine martyrdom. It was constantly suggested that the high
point of female heroism was to commit suicide rather than face the ‘dishonour’ of rape,
as if the shame and guilt for the crime would fall on the victim rather than on the
perpetrator. The desperate actions of such women were admired as an example of
feminine virtue rather than deplored as an example of female subjection. India might
have had the most visible female politicians of any nation, but the notion that a
woman’s chastity was worth more than her life abounded, even among the political
class. Jawahar’s cousin, Rameshwari Nehru, visited Thoa Khalsa, where ninety Sikh
women had committed collective suicide by jumping into a well rather than face a
Muslim attack. ‘It was eighteen days after the incident that we arrived at this sacred
spot’, she wrote. ‘The bodies of those beautiful women had become swollen and oated
up to the surface of the water. Their colourful clothes and long, black hair could be seen
clearly. Two or three women still had [the bodies of] infants clinging to their breasts.’
She was with a large group of observers come to gawp at this gruesome spectacle. ‘We
thought of it as our great good fortune that we had been able to visit this site and
worship these satis’.56
The violence in the Punjab was getting worse, rather than better. On the night of 25
August, the small town of Sheikhupura, near Lahore – with a population of 10,000
Muslims, and 10,000 Hindus and Sikhs – exploded into a massive pitched battle, for no
reason anyone could ascertain. It had previously been known as one of the quietest
spots in the West Punjab. Twenty-four hours later, several thousand people, mostly Sikh
and Hindu, had been murdered in a frenzy of stabbing, shooting, beating and burning,
and parts of the town were ablaze. No e ort had been made to quell the violence. The
Muslim police actually aided it. A journalist who visited Sheikhupura the next day found
a civil hospital in a disgusting state, with ies teeming thickly over the blood-soaked
rags that substituted for bandages, and the stench of death in the muggy monsoon air.
Most Sikhs were too scared to go to hospital, and were sheltering in their gurdwara
without even basic facilities. ‘Here there were more appalling sights’, he wrote; ‘men
and women whose hands had been cut o and whose forearms were black putrescent
y-covered stumps, and children, even babies, who had been cut and slashed. Perhaps
the most heart-rending spectacle of all was the young mothers who had lost their
children.’57 Visiting days later, Nehru described himself as ‘sick with horror’; still the
stink of blood and burnt human esh was inescapable. 58 His car was stopped by
Muslims, shouting at him to stop the war. ‘Are you not ashamed of yourselves?’ Nehru
shouted back. ‘Have you no conscience left? What do these houses and these dead bodies
show? Who is conducting this war?’59
Nehru wrote to Mountbatten in deep depression. ‘I suppose I am not directly
responsible for what is taking place in the Punjab’, he wrote. ‘I do not quite know who
is responsible. But in any event I cannot and do not wish to shed my responsibility for
my people. If I cannot discharge the responsibility e ectively, then I begin to doubt
whether I have any business to be where I am.’60 Only the courageous spirit of Edwina
Mountbatten could lift him from this gloom. Indira Gandhi remembered one evening in
her father’s house when a telephone call came through from Patel. A train had just

arrived in Delhi from the Punjab, lled with dead bodies. Edwina turned up at
Jawahar’s door, and changed her high heels for sensible shoes. ‘I am just going to the
station,’ she announced. ‘And of course there was no security, no arrangements,’ said
Indira. ‘She just went.’61
The violence kept spreading. By 26 August, the great industrial city of Ludhiana was
aflame. At the end of August, Lahore was described as a ‘city of the dead’ by the Times of
India. Its mall was deserted, its shops shuttered, its roads empty except for military
vehicles. No Hindus or Sikhs were visible outside the refugee camps. Those refugees
brought stories of thousands shot by police and the army in the nearby towns; 16,000
languished in the camps, with hardly any food; 8,000 or 9,000 were supposed to be in
one camp at Jullundur, and most of them had had just one meal in the ve days up to
24 August.62 At some of the camps, food was not free; unsurprisingly, few among the
refugees had brought supplies of cash. Local banks closed down under threat of looting,
and it was not long before even the wealthy went hungry. Driving to the town of
Hasilpur, Penderel Moon noticed great heaps of what he thought was manure piled up
along the roadside. When he got closer, the horrible truth became clear, and he
exclaimed, ‘They’re corpses!’ Three hundred and fty Hindu and Sikh men, women and
children were piled up in heaps, arms and legs sticking out at odd angles, bodies
hideously contorted. They were the victims of a Pathan mob that had passed through
that morning. In the town he found a weeping group of women and children
desperately fanning the ies away from two or three blood-drenched survivors. ‘It was
hard to endure,’ Moon remembered. ‘We could do nothing to help.’63 It was announced
that every available plane of the British long-haul carrier BOAC would be sent to India
and Pakistan to evacuate Europeans. Paradoxically, the Europeans were those in the
least danger.64
On 29 August, in the middle of the Punjabi holocaust, the Punjab Boundary Force was
actually disbanded at the order of a Joint Defence Council meeting in Lahore.
Mountbatten, Auchinleck and General Rees were profoundly opposed to this action, but
their hands were forced by the other members, including Nehru, Baldev, Liaquat and
Jinnah, and by public opinion. Indian and Pakistani representatives alike argued that
the force needed to be reformed under the command of each national government. Each
government wanted direct military control over its new borders; rumours circulated in
the press that the force was hoarding the best o cers. On the ground, the force was
accused of having communal sympathies. Rees admitted that the internal atmosphere of
the force had become impossible to maintain by the end of August, though he noted that
there were many examples of courage and lack of prejudice among the troops. One Sikh
major, guarding a train full of Muslim refugees, took three bullets and six spear wounds
while fearlessly ghting o a mob of his co-religionists. 65 There were much more
credible allegations of partiality against the police, but the visibility of the force made it
a focus for resentment. Edwina had returned from the Punjab the day before, and
repeated to Dickie that such allegations were now widespread. Reluctantly, he gave in.
The one e ort he had been able to make towards protecting the Punjabis had fallen
flat.66

On the last day of August, Calcutta, too, nally succumbed to the communal fury, and
there was a furious demonstration against Gandhi’s mission. A mob broke into the
Belliaghatta mansion in which he was staying, bearing a wounded Hindu who they
alleged had been stabbed by a Muslim, and demanded he call for revenge. He refused to
do any such thing: without a tremor he stood to face them, quietly, with arms folded.
Someone threw a brick. Another hit at him with a lathi, and narrowly missed him. The
eighteen days of peace in Calcutta between the Mahatma’s arrival and the end of August
had been the longest and most notable interlude of calm in that city for a year, and
were a direct result of Gandhi’s awe-inspiring presence in the popular imagination. But
the peace could not hold, and the dozens rioting that night had to be dispersed by police
armed with tear gas.67
That same evening, the lm at Government House in Delhi was Men of Two Worlds, a
thoughtful drama about colonialism in Africa. A young musician from Tanganyika is
sent to London, and returns fteen years later as a health worker. He nds himself
caught in a bitter con ict with his village’s witch doctor. His Western sophistications
o end his tribe’s traditions – and the British workers in the village cannot agree about
whether or not their civilization is worth emulating, either. It is not known who was
choosing the lms at Government House, but he or she must have been a perceptive
critic. One of the biggest questions facing the war-ravaged subcontinent was whether
Nehru’s Western ideals, or Gandhi’s traditional medicine, would heal India. As it turned
out, neither would work fast enough. Within a week of the lm’s screening, the situation
right in the heart of India’s capital was to get much, much worse.

CHAPTER 16: THE BATTLE FOR DELHI

‘ONE MILLION DEAD’ : THIS IS THE MOST CONVENIENT NUMBER to have come out of the wildly varying
estimates of how many people may have been killed following partition. Mountbatten
preferred the lowest available estimate, which was 200,000, and has been widely
condemned for it: the denial of holocausts is always a sticky business, and yet more so
when one may be implicated personally.1 Indian estimates have ranged as high as 2
million. Many historians have settled for a gure of somewhere between half a million
and 1 million. The gure of 1 million dead has now been repeated so often that it is
accepted as historical fact. ‘What is the basis for this acceptance?’ asked the historian
Gyanendra Pandey. ‘That it appears like something of a median?’2 Unfortunately so, for
the truth is that no one knows how many people were killed, nor how many were
raped, mutilated or traumatized. The numbers anyone chooses say more about their
political inclination than about the facts. Fewer than 400,000 suggests an apologia for
British rule; 400,000 to 1 million moderation; 1 million or more usually indicates that
the person intends to blame the deaths on a speci c party, the most usual culprits being
one or more of Mountbatten, Patel, Jinnah or the Sikhs.
Beyond the dead, there were more numbers, too, plucked from the extrapolations and
imaginations of regional o cials, army, police and historians. Refugees on the move by
the beginning of September: 500,000, or perhaps 1 million. Women abducted and raped:
75,000, or perhaps 125,000. Total who would migrate from one dominion to the other
between 1947 and 1948: 10 million, or perhaps 12 million, or perhaps 15 million. The
Indian National Archives contain sheaves of charts scribbled by British and Indian
o cials, recording 87 killed in Bengal here, 43 injured in Madras there. ‘The gures
make no pretence to accuracy,’ admitted the Home Department. The Punjab
government reported that its casualty estimates were ‘increasing daily as investigation
uncovers further tragedies’; the North-West Frontier Province government referred to
‘stray murders’, which were not counted.3 Usually it was impossible to count the number
of victims amid the ‘confused heap of rubble & corpses’ that was left behind after riots.4
Sir Francis Mudie, Governor of the West Punjab, remembered that he had to ‘ignore any
report of a riot unless it alleged that there were at least a thousand dead. If there were, I
asked for a further report, but I cannot remember any case in which I was able to do
anything.’5
In Stalin’s famous words, one death is a tragedy; one million deaths is a statistic. In
this case, it is not even a particularly good statistic. The very incomprehensibility of
what a million horrible and violent deaths might mean, and the impossibility of
producing an appropriate response, is perhaps the reason that the events following
partition have yielded such a great and moving body of ctional literature and such an

inadequate and imsy factual history. What does it matter to the readers of history
today whether there were 200,000 deaths, or 1 million, or 2 million? On that scale, is it
possible to feel proportional revulsion, to be ve times more upset at 1 million deaths
than at 200,000? Few can grasp the awfulness of how it might feel to have their fathers
barricaded in their houses and burnt alive, their mothers beaten and thrown o
speeding trains, their daughters torn away, raped and branded, their sons held down in
full view, screaming and pleading, while a mob armed with rough knives hacked o
their hands and feet. All these things happened, and many more like them; not just
once, but perhaps a million times. It is not possible to feel su cient emotion to
appreciate this monstrous savagery and su ering. That is the true horror of the events
in the Punjab in 1947: one of the vilest episodes in the whole of history, a devastating
illustration of the worst excesses to which human beings can succumb. The death toll is
just a number.
Amid these dark tales came one remarkable sign of hope. In Bengal, Gandhi had been
faced with the collapse of his hard-won peace. Once again, packs of armed goondas
(gangsters) ruled the streets of Calcutta. The years had not been kind to Gandhi. The
Salt March had been the apogee of his power and in uence; the 1930s a struggle, bitter
and increasingly opposed, culminating in a private breakdown; the early 1940s a
calamity, with the ill-judged Quit India campaign and mass departure of Muslims from
Congress; the later 1940s a wilderness, with his presence treated as an irritation. And
yet, despite intense personal disa ection and marginalization by his colleagues, the
Mahatma would rally for a nal, spectacular swansong. With Calcutta detonating
around him, he decided to fast.
Used against the British raj during the war, Gandhi’s fasts had become useless as a
political weapon. The British government had decided to let Gandhi die, concluding that
the short-term consequences of Gandhi’s death might be easier to manage than the longterm consequences of Gandhi’s life. But as a moral weapon the fasts had power, and
now a moral weapon was required. Against the goondas of Calcutta, Gandhi’s fast
would prove astonishingly successful.
On 2 September, the Mahatma renounced all food and sustenance except sips of
water, and reclined on a cot in a public room at the house in Belliaghatta. The e ect
was unprecedented. Over the course of little more than a day, the city calmed, and the
processions to his house changed their temper from angry mob to penitent pilgrimage.
From all parties and all faiths, leaders came to beg with him to give up his fast and save
his life. He replied that it was not a question of saving his life. The fast was ‘intended to
stir the conscience and remove mental sluggishness’; if the people’s consciences were
stirred, there might be the side-e ect that he would live. The hours passed, with burly
goondas turning up to weep contritely by the Mahatma’s bedside. Finally, on the
evening of 4 September, when all the city leaders had signed a pledge that there would
be no further trouble in Calcutta, Gandhi broke his fast with a drink of fruit juice.6 ‘In
the Punjab we have 55,000 soldiers and large-scale rioting on our hands’, an awestruck
Mountbatten wrote to him. ‘In Bengal our forces consist of one man, and there is no
rioting.’7 To the wonder of all observers, Gandhi’s achievement would endure beyond his

presence in the city. Aside from a few isolated incidents – no more than in normal times
of peace – Calcutta remained orderly for months.
Recovering quickly, the seventy-seven-year-old Mahatma left Calcutta and headed for
the place where the need for his moral power was greatest: the Punjab. On the way, he
planned to break his journey brie y at Delhi. But, by the time he got there, the capital
itself would become the new focus of communal fury.
At the end of August the Mountbattens had gone back up to Simla. The day after they
arrived, they had held a farewell party for an aide-de-camp who was returning to
England. His train was hijacked, and all 100 Muslims on board murdered – except his
own bearer, who hid under a seat. The day after that, the Mountbattens heard that their
treasurer and his wife had been killed in another train massacre.8 In Delhi, panic began.
From the city centre, smoke could be seen unfurling from nearby villages and the town
of Gurgaon. Three hundred Muslims ed to Palam air eld, where they had to be
protected by Indian Army troops.9
Appalled, Edwina told Dickie she was going back to the capital.10 On 4 September, he
was summoned back, too. The Mountbattens arrived the following day, along with Lord
Ismay, recalled from his holiday in Kashmir.11 By that time, Delhi was in turmoil. Bloodchilling reports landed hourly on the desks of government o cials. A bomb exploded in
the Fatehpuri Masjid, a seventeenth-century mosque at the western end of Chandni
Chowk. The police arrived to nd a mob throwing bricks at it while troops red on
them. Two Hindus were shot dead.12 In Karol Bagh, between New and Old Delhi,
children of all faiths were sitting their matriculation examinations in a local high school,
when goondas stormed in and demanded that the Muslim boys be separated from the
rest. The boys were taken into another room and slaughtered like animals.13
Mountbatten set up an emergency committee, which met for the rst time that
afternoon. Patel was full of rage, while Nehru sat at the table with an expression of allconsuming sorrow on his face.14 ‘If we go down in Delhi,’ Mountbatten told them rmly,
‘we are nished.’15 He immediately set up a large and splendid map room in
Government House, fitted out with lots of charts, graphs and telephones. His staff stayed
up for two nights getting all the little ags into the correct places to represent the
Punjab boundary. So exhausted was the lieutenant colonel in charge of this e ort that
he fainted while showing the committee around the room on 8 September.16
Mountbatten devoted much of his own time to concerns such as whether visitors ought
to come through a special entrance and be given a special pass.17
At the suggestion of Nehru, Edwina Mountbatten was put in charge of the emergency
committee’s refugee group. While Dickie was still ddling with his map room, Edwina
established and chaired the United Council for Relief and Welfare. It was a swift,
e ective and hands-on attempt to deal with the reality of the situation. Edwina
coordinated fteen separate relief organizations, two government ministries and one
Mahatma into a single targeted team with clear instructions and purpose.18 She began
touring the worst areas of trouble, mobilizing volunteers and personally directing the
Red Cross e ort to improve water, sanitation and medical supplies. Through the United
Council, she suggested initiatives ranging from the establishment of a sister organization

in Pakistan, all the way down to the setting up of Girl Guide knitting circles to provide
pullovers for refugees.19 A sure sign of her e ectiveness was that the Governor General’s
aides-de-camp began to try to avoid being on her sta . Anyone required to serve with
Edwina would have to help with a variety of gruesome tasks in unpleasant locations.
She stopped her car when she saw injured or dead people, got out, dodged bullets, and
retrieved their bodies to take them to hospitals or morgues. She also ordered her
husband’s personal bodyguards to forget about him and patrol the hospitals, following a
number of unspeakable attacks on helpless patients as they lay in the wards.20 In
Edwina’s wake, the main Emergency Committee also got into its swing, cancelling all
holidays – including Sundays – to keep the economy going, punishing errant o cials,
and arranging a volunteer police force.
The battle to bring Delhi back under control was prolonged and vicious. On 6
September, a bomb was thrown into New Delhi’s packed railway station, aimed at
eeing Muslims. The police arrived and red into a massed Hindu crowd. By this point,
450 were reckoned to have been killed in the previous forty-eight hours of rioting alone.
But the worst was still to come. The following day, outbursts of violence erupted all
across Delhi, so simultaneously and so brutally that many thought it must have been
planned. Looters descended on Connaught Circus, the huge central plaza of New Delhi,
built by the proud British as concentric circles of graceful neoclassical arcades. This
forum was lled with a baying mob, which began to smash up Muslim-owned shops. The
army arrived, and attempted unsuccessfully to disperse the crowd with bullets and teargas. Nehru himself arrived a little later armed with a stick, plunged into the crowd and
chased looters away from outside the Odeon Cinema. The orgy of destruction was not
con ned to goondas. Nirad Chaudhuri, who was present, described middle-class couples
strolling away from the scene, loaded down with stolen handbags, cosmetics and bottles
of scent. He also saw tongas, the light horse-drawn taxis mainly driven by Muslims, left
burning by the sides of the road. Their drivers had been dragged from them and
murdered. When he returned to his house, he looked back on a view of the city
colonnaded with pillars of smoke from arson attacks, and soundtracked by the screams
of re engines and bursts of gun re. That evening, 6000 Muslims ed from their homes
in the middleclass Lodi Colony to the Pak Transfer Office in Connaught Place.21
The rest of 7 September was punctuated by repeated blasts of re from Sten guns.22
Serious rioting was simultaneously underway in the princely state of Mysore in the
south. In Bangalore shops were looted, apparently by police as well as civilians, and
Congressmen arrested for lawbreaking.23 In Karachi that day, Jinnah was holding a
garden party for the Emir of Kuwait, which was gatecrashed by 500 government
workers demanding the rescue of their families from Delhi. Karachi itself had seen a
slew of train attacks, bombings and assaults.24
By this point, thousands of Muslims had clustered in any part of Delhi that o ered
sanctuary: the Jama Masjid; the Purana Qila (Old Fort); Muslim graveyards and Mughal
ruins; the Pakistani High Commission; the houses and gardens of well-known Muslims,
including Nehru’s two Muslim cabinet ministers, Abul Kalam Azad and Ra Ahmed
Kidwai; and even Humayun’s Tomb, the same gorgeous marble mausoleum that had

brie y sheltered the eeing Mughal Emperor Bahadur Shah II ninety years before.
Outside the camps, things kept getting worse. On 8 September at Sabzimandi, north of
Old Delhi, a confrontation between troops and rioters lasted for twelve hours, leaving
the roads ‘littered with bodies’, and the town ‘burnt to ashes’, according to the British
High Commissioner.25 Paharganj, just north of Connaught Circus, was reported to be
‘like a battle- eld’, its streets lled with dead animals, its buildings ablaze, and the
constant pattering of machine-gun re in the air.26 All ights from Bombay and other
cities into Delhi were cancelled. Reports suggested that 600,000 were involved in rioting
in the city, and Muslim estimates put their death toll at 10,000. The telephone,
telegraph and post systems shut down, as did all public transport.27 A shoot-to-kill order
was issued to Delhi police and armed forces. Patel called the Sikh leaders to a meeting,
and threatened to set up ‘concentration camps’ and put all Sikhs in them unless the
leaders appealed for an end to the violence. They duly did.28 All weapons were banned
except, to Jinnah’s fury, Sikh kirpans, which had to be sheathed.29 In conjunction with
Pakistan’s Prime Minister, Liaquat Ali Khan, Nehru organized an airdrop of more than
100,000 lea ets over the Punjab, saying that lawbreakers would be hunted down
without mercy or hesitation. By the end of the day, the number of Muslims in the Pak
Transfer Office in Connaught Place had doubled to 12,000.
The following day, the riot spread to Bara Hindu Rao, on the north side of Old Delhi.
Insurgents had equipped themselves with hand grenades and rearms, and the police
and troops had great di culty in regaining order. More than 5000 residents had to be
evacuated the following morning.30 The Pakistani High Commissioner, who had no
means of communicating with his government and had long run out of food, absconded
to the air eld with the intention of escaping to Karachi. Mountbatten heard in time, and
sent a member of his sta to go and pull the man o the plane. The Governor General
was acutely aware that the arrival of a hysterical diplomat ‘would have sent Mr. Jinnah
through the roof’.31 Such was the confusion that the Pakistani government received the
impression that its High Commissioner had been murdered, and a diplomatic incident
was only narrowly avoided.32 The High Commissioner was persuaded to delay his
departure for two days and allow Lord Ismay to accompany him but, once they got to
Pakistan, Ismay was unable to force the terrified man to return to Delhi.33
Filled with aggrieved Sikhs, Hindus and Muslims, the capital had become a crucible
for the rages that had boiled up across the Punjab. Large-scale riots were no longer a
daily, but an hourly threat. In terror, the citizens of Delhi began to mark themselves out
with visible signs that they were not Muslim. Hindus shaved their hair to leave a
traditional ‘shikha’ tuft on the crown, and left shirts unbuttoned to show the white
sacred thread worn across the chest. Indian Christians began to sew large red crosses on
to their shirts. All the shops in central Delhi displayed placards saying ‘Hindu Shop’,
regardless of their ownership. These public displays of religious identity only made the
conflict more tribal.34
‘We are dealing with a situation which is analogous to war,’ announced Nehru on AllIndia Radio, ‘and we are going to deal with it on a war basis in every sense of the
word.’35 But his tough stance isolated him from many in Congress, who conspicuously

refrained from condemning Hindu atrocities in fear that they would lose the support of
the Hindu majority. Nehru reminded the party’s president, Rajendra Prasad, that under
Gandhi’s leadership Congress had always condemned even minor acts of violence. Now
its politicians refused to criticize murder, rape and communal hatred. ‘I have no stomach
for this leadership’, Nehru wrote in disgust. ‘Unless we keep to some standards, freedom
has little meaning’.36 All hopes were now pinned on the small, khadi-draped gure who
arrived in the capital by train that day.
Gandhi arrived back to great acclaim and expectations. ‘Delhi will now be saved,’
Muslims told each other. ‘Muslims will now be saved.’37 It was not just Muslims that
would be saved, but Nehru, too. Gandhi returned from his triumph in Calcutta with his
reputation at a new high, and immediately made his support public for Nehru’s
unpopular policies of protecting Muslims, maintaining full religious tolerance, and
avoiding war with Pakistan. His arrival had come at a time of desperate need. For those
who had survived the riots so far, conditions in Delhi were grim. Communal feeling was
so ingrained that, despite Nehru’s e orts, Indian government aid had only found its way
to Hindu and Sikh refugees. Muslim refugees had been left to the Pakistani High
Commission and non-governmental peace committees. Gandhi insisted that the
government take responsibility for all faiths.38 Finding that the Untouchable settlement
at the Bhangi Colony was now a refugee camp, Gandhi roomed in the grand New Delhi
mansion of his sponsor, G.D. Birla. He visited dangerous sites, though with di culty.
When he visited Hindu camps, so uncontrollable was the ‘rush for darshan’, according to
the Times of India, that he did not get a chance to speak.39 One of the rst people to visit
him was Edwina Mountbatten. Through her e orts for the refugees she formed a
working bond with Gandhi that was even closer than her friendship with him in the
months before partition.
In response to the crises of September, Nehru ourished. One of his oldest friends, Sri
Prakasa, remembered sitting in sickened silence at the thought of the crisis when Nehru
came and sat by his side. ‘There are only two things left for us now, Prakasa,’ Nehru
said with a ection. ‘To go under or overcome our di culties. And we are not going
under.’40 He devoted himself to his constant work with courage and diligence. ‘Almost
alone in the turmoil of communalism,’ noted Alan Campbell-Johnson, ‘he speaks with
the voice of reason and charity.’41 He set up a city of tents in his garden and lled that
and his house with refugees, including two Muslim children he had personally rescued
from a roof in Old Delhi while a riot raged below.42 Every day, he walked in the streets
and listened to people tell him their sorrows. ‘I know, I know, mere bhai [my brother],
it is my sorrow too,’ he replied.43 The old Nehru temper ared up frequently. Jawahar
was being driven in his o cial car when he noticed a Hindu passerby with a cart full of
loot from a Muslim neighbourhood. Immediately, he leapt out and told the thief to take
it back. ‘They have their Pakistan, we will have our Hindustan,’ replied the man, at
which Jawahar ew into a rage, grabbed him by the throat and shook him. ‘If I must die
it is an honour to do so at your hands, Panditji,’ gasped the man. Jawahar dropped him
in disgust and returned to his car.44
During that rst September fortnight, Jawahar’s friendship with Dickie Mountbatten

strengthened. ‘He has come suddenly to see me alone on more than one occasion –
simply and solely for company in his misery; to unburden his soul; and to obtain what
comfort I have to give’, Dickie wrote to the King.45 But Jawahar’s relationship with
Edwina Mountbatten became more important still. While Dickie chaired committees,
both Jawahar and Edwina fearlessly went out into the streets of Delhi to deal with the
rioters. Edwina was with her friend, the Health Minister Amrit Kaur, when they heard
that Jawahar had gone out alone. They found him attempting to stop a crowd of armed
men. ‘Brought him back!’ Edwina wrote.46 Another evening, Jawahar heard of an attack
planned on the Jamia Millia Islamia, a Muslim college outside Delhi. The college was in
the middle of riot-torn countryside. At night, the students, fearing for their lives, turned
o their lamps and stood guard. They could hear splashes as Muslims from nearby
villages were chased into the Jumna River, pursued by mobs intent on drowning them.
Without waiting to organize a bodyguard for himself, Jawahar got into a taxi and drove
alone through the treacherous countryside straight there – only to nd Edwina already
on the site, without guards, trying to pacify the would-be raiders.47 ‘Did we get our
freedom so that you could kill each other?’ Jawahar shouted at the mob. ‘He was,’ noted
one observer, ‘a man who had no fear.’48
Again and again, events brought the two together. Richard Symonds, a friend of
Edwina’s who was working alongside her in Delhi and the Punjab, noted the value of
her friendship with Jawahar for the relief e ort. ‘If we had problems where the Prime
Minister’s attention was needed,’ he remembered, ‘she’d got it.’49 At eleven o’clock one
evening, Jawahar’s sister Betty was in her brother’s house at York Road, when a
telephone call came through from Edwina. Jawahar was not in, so she took the call –
noting with interest that the Governor General’s wife had telephoned her brother
personally, rather than having an aide-de-camp ring up. ‘Haven’t you heard that there is
ghting between a Hindu and a Muslim camp?’ Edwina asked. ‘The rumor [sic] is that a
Muslim from his camp shot a Hindu woman in their camp. So now the Hindus are up in
arms throwing stones at the Muslims who are unable to protect themselves; and there
aren’t enough guards. So I am going down there and I called to see if your brother
would like to come with me, but of course …’
Without hesitation, Betty o ered to come in Jawahar’s place. Edwina at rst
demurred. ‘I can’t have you hurt or dead on my hands,’ she said; but eventually she
agreed that Betty might be helpful. Shortly afterwards, she arrived in a jeep, escorted by
another in front and one behind, with discreetly armed guards. Together, the women
drove out of the city to the Muslim camp in question. It was surrounded by an enormous
and agitated crowd of Hindus and Sikhs, who were attempting to set it on re. The few
guards present could do little and had been backed against the wall. The man whose
wife had been shot was leading the arsonists, screaming, ‘Nehru is protecting the
Muslims and this is what they do!’
Edwina climbed out of the jeep, pushed past her guards and positioned herself
between the mob and the camp gate. She turned to face the crowd, bricks and stones
whizzing over her head, ‘as calmly as though she were at a garden party in the Moghul
Gardens’, remembered Betty. Edwina started to address the mob, but her command of

Hindustani was not adequate. Betty took over, jumping on top of the jeep and shouting
for the crowd to stand down. She told them that her brother was away, but would be
back the next day and would be sure to find the murderer.
Some of the protesters calmed down at her words, but the widowed man still
attempted to incite them further. ‘All right,’ Edwina said to Betty. ‘Now tell them that if
they continue this way we will order the guards to shoot down the agitators, it doesn’t
matter which side they are on.’
Betty realized immediately that calling the mob’s blu was a risky strategy. Even with
their guards, she and Edwina were massively outnumbered by the rioters. If it came to a
ght, they would probably be torn to pieces. But, lacking other options, she shouted out
the message. To her great relief, it worked. The shouting stopped, and the crowd
dispersed.
When the panic had subsided, Edwina and Betty went into the camp to talk to the
terri ed Muslims, who pleaded their innocence and said they had no guns. Betty was
inclined to believe them. Most were half-naked, and none had many possessions. An
hour later, they headed back to York Road, to nd Jawahar just returned. Edwina told
him the story. ‘Poor Bhai was so tired and distressed that he ew into one of his ne
rages, angry at both sides,’ Betty recalled. He started an investigation the very next
morning. It found that the dead woman had long been ill with tuberculosis. Worn out by
caring for her, her husband had shot her himself – and blamed it on a Muslim. Unlike
most of those involved in the partition war, who escaped prosecution, he was later
convicted of murder.50
At the beginning of September 1947, Edwina noted in her diary her surprise at how
deeply fond of Jawahar she had become.51 The feeling was obviously mutual. In at least
one photograph of the two of them visiting a refugee camp, Jawahar’s hand can be seen
clasped protectively around Edwina’s. Jawahar’s niece, Nayantara Pandit, came to live
with him in October, and observed the relationship rst hand. ‘It was a very deep
emotional attachment, there’s no doubt about that,’ she remembered. ‘I think it had all
the poignance of the lateness of the hour … that terrible cut-o -ness from the world,
and anxieties about India, where are we going, all the rest of it. And then to nd this –
and for her, apparently, also a great and unique love.’52
Dickie would subtly facilitate Edwina’s relationship with Jawahar, just as he had with
her other lovers; more so, in fact, for he liked Jawahar. But stoicism comes at a cost, and
there is a glimpse of it in a letter Dickie wrote to Noël Coward in October. The lm at
Government House had been Coward’s masterpiece Brief Encounter, released two years
previously and recommended to Dickie by Noël at the time.53 In it, a woman married to
a kind but undemonstrative man falls in love with a passionate doctor. She goes through
a spectrum of feelings, from exhilaration to despair; her husband simply keeps doing the
crossword. Dickie, too, was rmly entrenched in the role of the accepting husband,
though he preferred genealogy to crosswords. The congruence between the lm and his
own situation can only have been enhanced by the fact that Coward had based scripts
on the Mountbattens before; and that Celia Johnson, the Edwina-lookalike actress in the
lead role, had appeared in Coward and Mountbatten’s In Which We Serve as the wife of

the Mountbatten character.
‘I have just seen “Brief Encounter” in our private cinema, and cannot refrain from
writing to tell you how deeply it moved me’, wrote Dickie to Noël.54 The two men had
drifted apart somewhat in recent years, but something about Brief Encounter had
a ected Dickie on an intimate level. It is almost the only instance among all his papers
in which he can be seen to respond emotionally to any piece of art.55
So great had been the drama inside Delhi that it would have been possible to forget that
the Punjab had not yet calmed. Richard Symonds drove up the Grand Trunk Road in late
September, and observed fresh Muslim corpses by the side of the road. At a railway
station, he saw a band of 1000 Sikhs, armed with spears and kirpans, awaiting the
arrival of the Pakistan Express train, with its consignment of Muslim refugees. When he
arrived at the huge Kurukshetra refugee camp, it was to a scene of total disaster: cut o
by monsoon rains and ooding, the camp had little food, no clothing, no blankets, no
lighting, no medical supplies, and twice the number of people that it could
accommodate in its tents.56
On 21 September, the Mountbattens took Nehru, Patel and a few others on a round
trip in Dickie’s plane to view the Punjab migrations. Near Ferozepur, they found the
rst caravan – and followed it for over fty miles against the stream of refugees without
nding its source.57 The refugees moved slowly, in bullock carts or on foot, carrying
children, the elderly and the in rm on their backs. Vultures followed the convoys,
waiting for deaths which came frequently. Exhausted families would sometimes be
forced to abandon their invalid relatives by the roadside rather than carry them
further.58 Su ering pushed the communities further apart. Punjabi Hindu women
entering Delhi openly rejoiced at the sight of streets lled with Muslim corpses.
According to Nirad Chaudhuri, ‘the group of corpses which drew forth the strongest
expression of delight from the ladies was that of a mother lying dead with her dead baby
clasped in her arms.’59
That night, the party returned to Government House, where the Sunday lm was A
Matter of Life and Death, and the Sunday dinner was austere. The severe rations in
Government House became severer still under Edwina’s watchful eye. When Lord
Listowel, the former Secretary of State for India and now Secretary of State for Burma,
came to visit, the Mountbattens threw a full ceremonial banquet with all the state pomp
– and served a rst course of cabbage-water, followed by a main course of one slice of
Spam with a potato, and nished o with a solitary biscuit and a small piece of
cheese.60 ‘The ADCs are mad with rage at me’, Edwina wrote with satisfaction, ‘as they
think food can be spirited out of the skies’.61
Even after Delhi was subdued the situation outside Government House remained dire.
The camps had not been prepared: there was no water, no food, no sanitation, no
security. Anees Kidwai, the widow of a murdered government o cial and sister-in-law
of Communications Minister Ra Ahmed Kidwai, went to work in the camp at the
Purana Qila. She described a shambolic mass of tents among which ‘naked children,

unkempt women, girls without their heads covered and men overcome with anger
wandered up and down endlessly’.62 Still no one kept count of how many Muslim
refugees there were. By the middle of September, around 60 per cent of the Muslims of
Old Delhi and 90 per cent of the Muslims of New Delhi were thought to have left their
homes. There were thousands clustered into each of the biggest camps, at the Purana
Qila and Humayun’s Tomb: perhaps 60,000 in each, perhaps 80,000, perhaps even
100,000. Thousands more had been killed – was it 20,000 now? 30,000? No one knew.63
Someone had counted 137 mosques damaged, a few of which had been forcibly
converted into Hindu temples, looted for their libraries, and hung with ags of the
fundamentalist Hindu Mahasabha. Gandhi mourned, and condemned the desecration as
‘a blot on Hinduism and Sikhism’.64
To the north and east, Pakistan fared ill. Like India, it su ered riots; trains full of dead
bodies turned up in its stations; rich Hindu merchants streamed out of its cities, despite
e orts by the Pakistani government to persuade them to stay. 65 Grim conditions
prevailed at West Pakistan’s refugee camps. Richard Symonds remembered gaunt
women with half-starved babies throwing themselves at his feet, their ration in some
camps just two ounces of our a day – enough to make one single chapati. 66 Unlike
India, Pakistan had to deal with these problems on an empty treasury. The Punjab, its
only pro table region, had collapsed. As a result of the migrations, Pakistan had lost 4
million people who had been settled, established and productive, and gained 5 million
destitute refugees.67 British India had not been poor, but the dominions had not yet
agreed on the details by which its assets would be divided between them. In the
meantime, India held on to the lot, while Pakistan struggled to cope. Even at the most
basic level, the logistics of setting up the new government had proven impossible. When
Ghulam Mohammed, the Finance Minister, had turned up in his Karachi o ce on 15
August for his rst day’s work, he had found it bare except for one table. Everything else
had been sent on a train from Delhi, and looted en route.68
Jinnah was livid at what he saw as a deliberate sabotaging of Pakistan. In early
September, Ismay had visited him in Karachi and, according to Alan Campbell-Johnson,
found the Quaid-e-Azam seething on the brink of ‘precipitate action’.69 He wrote irate
letters to Attlee, demanding the help of the Commonwealth; but Attlee had no intention
of wading into a ght between two dominions.70 Jinnah appealed to all the other
Commonwealth governments directly, and Ismay began to suspect his aim was to push
India out of the Commonwealth altogether.71 At the beginning of October, Jinnah sent
another long letter to Attlee. By then, the strain was making him ill. Jinnah’s writing
was full of spelling mistakes and repetition. ‘I regret to say that every e ort is being
made to put di culties in our way by our enemies in order to paralyse or cripple our
State and bring about its collapse’, he began. ‘It is amazing that the top-most Hindu
leaders repeatedly say that Pakistan will have to submit to the Union of India. Pakistan
will never surrender’.72 At the bottom, the usually sharp ‘M.A. Jinnah’ was signed with a
tremulous hand.

Under the circumstances, Jinnah saw that he would have to cultivate international
allies. On 7 September, he had told a cabinet meeting that communism could ‘not
ourish in the soil of Islam’, and that Pakistan’s interests would best be served by
friendship with ‘the two great democratic countries, namely, the U.K. and the U.S.A.,
rather than with Russia’.73 Jinnah sought to present his new nation as a crucial strategic
ally: a bu er zone between Communist Russia and dubious India, and a vantage point
between China and the Middle East. For most of the nineteenth century, Britain and
Russia had played the ‘Great Game’ for primacy in Central Asia. Now a new Great Game
was beginning, and elements in the United States government were already beginning
to realize that Pakistan – though they had opposed its creation – presented a more
amenable prospect than India. From Jinnah’s point of view, this had one great
advantage: money. The Pakistani Finance Minister had already brought up the question
of possible nancial aid with the American Embassy in Karachi. Pakistan now asked the
United States for a massive $2 billion loan, for the purposes of development and
defence. In December, to the great disappointment of the Pakistani government, the
Americans would o er a more realistic $10 million. But the Cold War was only just
beginning; Pakistan’s argument that it should be supported for being anti-Russian would
be taken more seriously by the late 1950s, with happy results for its treasury.74
In the meantime, Jinnah was forced to go begging. He sent a letter to the Nizam of
Hyderabad on 15 October, reminding him of the ‘special claim’ Pakistan had on his
state, and that ‘the resources of the Dominion of India are very vast whereas Pakistan is
starting from scratch’. He concluded: ‘Please do not think that I am trying to get more
money. God is great, and we shall go through this dire calamity which has overtaken
us.’75 Three months later, he would ask the Nizam directly for a large loan.76
The status of Hyderabad troubled India, too. To Patel’s embarrassment, Nehru put
Mountbatten rather than him in charge of negotiation. Patel’s relationship with Nehru,
never great, was rapidly souring. Patel made it clear that he thought Nehru was too soft
on Muslims. Nehru made it clear that he disliked Patel’s Hinduchauvinist tone. With
almost half of his cabinet tending towards the establishment of India as a Hindu nation,
Nehru had to ght an increasingly hard battle against the swell of fundamentalist
feeling.77 ‘As long as I am at the helm of a airs India will not become a Hindu state,’
Nehru announced in a public speech, with a deliberate dig at the orthodox members of
his government. ‘The very idea of a theocratic state is not only medieval but also
stupid.’78 Lord Addison visited Delhi and Karachi in October, and reported back to Attlee
his fears about Patel. If Nehru’s government fell, he warned, Patel would probably take
over and install ‘an iron-handed system’, openly hostile to Pakistan.79
While the bigger problem of Hyderabad fermented, the Indian and Pakistani
governments had their opening skirmish over another princely state. Junagadh was a
small state wedged rmly amid Indian territory in Kathiawar. The Nawab of Junagadh
was a Muslim, ruling over a population that was over four- fths Hindu. Accession to
Pakistan, while tricky, was not impossible: Junagadh had a port on the Arabian Sea,
within reach of Karachi.80 The Nawab wavered, before on 16 September his Muslim
League government acceded to Pakistan.

Coming so soon after the great insurrection in Delhi had been quelled, the petty a air
of Junagadh provoked a far more serious reaction than it warranted. Patel wanted to
send troops in immediately. Nehru was more circumspect. Mountbatten suggested to
Nehru and Liaquat that both India and Pakistan should abide by the results of a
plebiscite, a procedure he hoped they would follow for any state. Nehru nodded
dejectedly, but Liaquat’s eyes lit up. Mountbatten noted that ‘There is no doubt that the
same thought was in each of their minds – “Kashmir!”‘81 Shortly afterwards, the Nawab
packed up his beloved dogs – of which there were 800, each with its own keeper – and
absconded to Pakistan, leaving his government and his subjects in some confusion.82 At
the beginning of November, India sent troops in at the invitation of the Junagadh
administration, to the fury of Pakistan. The promised plebiscite, held in February 1948,
would count only 91 votes for Pakistan, against 190,779 for India.83
Lord Addison’s assessment of the situation between India and Pakistan made
uncomfortable reading for those back in London. Jinnah was in such a weak position
nancially, militarily and administratively ‘that he would be quite unable to take any
action against India even if he wanted.’ Rather, Addison believed, the Quaid-e-Azam
was anxious to maintain, and possibly even increase, British involvement in Pakistan. ‘I
think it cannot be doubted that the danger to the British connection, and to the eventual
success of our policy for the establishment of a progressive Indian democracy, comes
much more from India than from Pakistan,’ he concluded.84 As far as the government in
London was concerned, Mountbatten might well be on the wrong side.
By October, there were thought to be around 400,000 Hindu and Sikh refugees from
the Punjab in Delhi. Thousands could not even t into the tent city that Nehru had set
up outside the capital, a sad and grimy echo of the gorgeous campsite that had been
pitched there for his wedding, thirty-one years before. Delhi’s own population had been
devastated: 330,000 Muslims had left, representing around one third of the city’s
population.85 Many refugees were obliged to sleep rough on Delhi streets, and
courtyards, doorways and gutters were lled with their huddled bodies. The death toll
continued to rise, not only from the epidemics of cholera, typhus and smallpox that
issued forth from the unsanitary camps, but also from tra c accidents. Dozens of
refugees who had collapsed, worn out, to sleep on the streets were run over each night.
‘At times I could not believe my eyes or ears,’ remembered Edwina a year later. ‘All I
can tell you is that the people I was privileged to work with did a superhuman job and I
would like to say that they were of all religions, of all nationalities, and of all beliefs. I
worked with Hindus, Muslims, Christians, Sikhs, Parsees, with people from India,
Pakistan, Canada, China and America.’86 She and Amrit Kaur continued to coordinate
the relief e ort, ensuring that vaccines were own in from Bombay, Madras and
Calcutta, and organizing campaigns to inoculate the migrants before they reached Delhi.
Edwina also kept Betty Hutheesing on call to visit hospitals, clinics and camps. ‘It was
amazing to see her in those terrible places,’ remembered Betty, ‘neither patronizing, nor
oversympathetic, but just talking naturally to the inmates. This is the hardest thing of all
to do when people are destitute, hopeless or dying.’87
Edwina coped well, but the stress was exacting a terrible toll on Jawahar. ‘Ever since

I assumed charge of my o ce, I have done nothing but tried to keep people from killing
each other or visited refugee camps and hospitals,’ he said. ‘All the plans which I had
drawn up for making India a prosperous and progressive country have had to be
relegated to the background.’88 Speaking at the end of September, he did not yet know
that arguably the greatest challenge of all was just about to begin.

CHAPTER 17: KASHMIR

landscapes. Iced Himalayan peaks soar up
KASHMIR IS OFTEN CALLED THE LOVELIEST OF THE SUBCONTINENT’S
from lush green valleys, dark forests sweep around the shores of glassy lakes. Before
1947, Muslims, Hindus, Buddhists and Sikhs had worked side by side in walnut groves
and cherry orchards, sa ron elds and lotus gardens. In ancient legends, Kashmir was
supposed to have been an inland sea, from which a wicked demon emerged to terrorize
the earth. The demon was nally quelled by the goddess Parvati, who dropped a
mountain on him – one of those which now forms the backdrop to the regional capital,
Srinagar. But, if a spirit of rage lived on beneath the mountain, the events of 1947
would awaken it.
Kashmir had come into existence as a princely state on 16 March 1846. The British
had acquired the territory following the First Sikh War, but lacked the resources or the
inclination to administer it. Instead they sold it under the Treaty of Amritsar to Gulab
Singh, the Raja of Jammu, for 750,000 rupees. It is sometimes said that this sale was the
root cause of the Kashmir con ict; either because Gulab Singh was a Dogra Hindu and
most of the people were Muslims or because he was, in the words of the Viceroy, Lord
Hardinge, ‘the greatest rascal in Asia’.1 But Kashmir had hosted a religiously mixed
population for centuries before the beginning of Dogra rule and, for 101 years following
the Treaty of Amritsar, it remained comparatively peaceable. Successive maharajas had
ruled despotically, and had discriminated to various degrees against Muslims, but the
region did not see any major incidents of unrest except once. In 1931, there had been
Muslim riots against the regime of Gulab Singh’s great-grandson, Maharaja Hari Singh;
these were soon quashed, and did not inspire any widespread rebellion.2 Though around
three-quarters Muslim, the population was neither homogeneous nor especially
orthodox. Buddhists formed the majority in remote Ladakh, perched high among the
slopes of the Himalayas; while most of the population of lower-lying Jammu was Hindu.
The stripped-down, casteless Bhakti form of Hinduism found favour with many. Mystical
traditions such as Islamic Su sm had extensive roots in the vale.3 When Jinnah had sent
a Muslim League envoy to Kashmir in 1943 to assess its potential, the conclusion had
been disheartening. ‘No important religious leader has ever made Kashmir … his home
or even an ordinary centre of Islamic activities’, wrote the envoy. ‘It will require
considerable e ort, spread over a long period of time, to reform them and convert them
into true Muslims.’4
All Kashmir’s diverse and agreeable ways of life had continued in relative stability
until soon after the partition of the subcontinent. Unlike the partition holocausts, whose
e ect was localized in time and space, the Kashmir crisis continues to pose one of the
most serious threats to international stability that the world has ever seen. Within the

space of three months, one of the most enchanting places on earth was transformed into
the eastern front of a slow-burning but devastating war, between Islam and ka rs
(non-Muslims) on either side of the Arabian lands, and between Islam and Islam in the
centre. The western front was to erupt just weeks later, in Palestine; the central
battleground, in Iraq, was already on the boil.
It is impossible to tell the story of what happened in Kashmir in 1947 without
upsetting at least one or, more likely, all of the factions that remain involved. The
following year, the Indian and Pakistani governments presented their cases to the
United Nations: their irreconcilable accounts of what had happened each lasted six
hours.5 Even at the time, international observers repeatedly complained that facts were
hard to come by, and harder yet to prove. Sixty years of furious debate has fogged the
view yet further.
It had always been assumed by the British, by the Muslim League, and indeed largely
by Congress apart from Nehru himself, that Kashmir would eventually go to Pakistan.6
Kashmir was the ‘K’ in Pakistan. Its population was predominantly Muslim. Its lines of
trade and communication ran into Pakistan. Around one quarter of Kashmir’s total
revenue came from timber, which was oated down the Jhelum and Chenab Rivers and
collected in towns in Pakistan. Other major exports were fruit and vegetables, also
exported through Rawalpindi; and woollens, including the prized cashmere, pashmina
and shahtoosh wools, which were sold through the West Punjab and the North-West
Frontier Province.7 There were only three roads running in and out of Kashmir. Two of
them went into Pakistan, and one into India – but it was the Maharaja’s private route, a
crumbling track described optimistically on the Ordnance Survey maps as ‘jeepable’, and
snowbound for five months of each year.8
Nehru held out hope that Kashmir would come into India. On 27 September, he had
written to Patel that he thought Pakistan would in ltrate Kashmir soon, with a view to
a full annexation just before the snows of winter made the region impossible to defend;
and that therefore its accession to India should be assured at the earliest possible
minute.9 ‘Kashmir a ects me in a peculiar way’, Nehru would write to Edwina
Mountbatten a few months later; ‘it is a kind of mild intoxication – like music sometimes
or the company of a beloved person’.10 His family’s descent from Kashmir is the rst
thing he describes on the rst page of his 1936 autobiography. During the struggle for
independence, he would often recuperate after his prison sentences with a vacation in
the Kashmiri mountains. For a person who had never quite tted in – too British for
India, too Indian for Britain – he had a powerful sense of belonging in Kashmir. ‘I have
a sense of coming back to my own’, he wrote to his daughter, Indira, in 1940; ‘it is
curious how race memories persist, or perhaps it is all imagination’.11 His love for the
state was about more than its beauty and harmony, though these were powerful pulls.
The implication of some historians that India claimed Kashmir because Nehru liked
going there for his holidays is a little unfair. Nehru had long been a passionate
supporter of the Congress-aligned National Conference in Kashmir, an overwhelmingly
Muslim political party led by his friend Sheikh Abdullah that constituted the e ective
opposition to the Maharaja. To him, the state was a powerful symbol of his belief that

India could not become a Hindustan, that Congress was a party for all faiths, and that
Muslims were no less Indian than Hindus. In the context of a subcontinent that had
descended into all-out holy wars, it is easy to see why such principles might have
become an obsession with the secular Nehru. Unfortunately, the same principles allowed
him to be manipulated by Vallabhbhai Patel, who was by now talking along openly
Islamophobic lines and eyeing an aggressively anti-Pakistan foreign policy. While Nehru
thought in terms of high ideals, Patel was concerned with enlarging Hindu India at the
expense of Pakistan.
The decision of the Maharaja, Sir Hari Singh, not to accede to Pakistan by 15 August
had been based on what was generally seen as a whimsical notion of remaining
independent. Both the British and Pakistani governments assumed that the Maharaja
would soon enough come to his senses and throw his lot in with Pakistan. But the
Maharaja was showing little sign of coming to his senses, and every sign of losing his
grip. He was under pressure from his wife and her brother, who served as his Household
Minister – both of whom were strongly in favour of joining India. Torn, he consulted his
astrologer, who held out for independence in picturesque terms, telling him that the
stars showed the ag of Gulab Singh ying from Lahore to Ladakh. 12 The Maharaja
consequently dismissed his moderate Prime Minister, who had apparently recommended
accession to Pakistan, and the British o cers who had remained in his armed and police
forces.13 He restocked his ranks from among his own Dogra people. Noting a change in
the wind, Muslim units swiftly began to desert the Kashmir Army.
During September and October 1947, the Maharaja’s Dogra-led troops carried out a
campaign of sustained harassment, arson, physical violence, and genocide against
Muslim Kashmiris in at least two areas – Poonch, right on the border with Pakistan, and
pockets of southern Jammu.14 Just as in the Punjab, precise numbers were impossible to
assess. According to some sources, more or less the entire Muslim population of Jammu,
amounting to around half a million people, was displaced, with around 200,000 of those
disappearing completely, ‘having presumably been butchered, or died from epidemics or
exposure’, noted Ian Stephens, the editor of the Calcutta Statesman.15 The Maharaja
meant to create a bu er zone of uninhabited land, approximately three miles wide,
between Kashmir and Pakistan.16 Muslims were pushed into Pakistan, or killed. Hindus
were sent the other way, deeper into Kashmir. India would deny that any holocaust had
taken place, perhaps because it had secretly been providing arms to the Dogra side: the
gures are open to question, but the fact that Muslim civilians were persecuted by the
Maharaja’s troops is not.17 C.B. Duke, the British Deputy High Commissioner in Lahore,
went to assess the situation in the third week of October. He saw around twenty burntout villages along the Chenab River inside the Kashmir border, and noted that many of
them contained the ashes of a mosque – ‘it was the Muslims who were su ering,’ he
concluded.18 The Maharaja had ordered ethnic cleansing under the guise of a defensive
strategy.
Thousands of refugees, mostly Muslims from Jammu, began to pour into Pakistan’s
Sialkot district, bringing with them sickening tales of atrocities. As it happened, Sialkot
was on the frontier of Pathan tribal territory. In driving out the Muslims on his borders,

the Maharaja had driven them straight into the arms of the most fearsome Islamic
ghting force on earth. ‘This is a dangerous game for the Maharaja to play,’ noted
Duke, ‘and is likely to lead to large-scale disturbances in Kashmir and incursion by
neighbouring Muslim tribesmen.’19 He was right. The Pathans, who had for months been
hearing tales of Sikh and Hindu outrages against their Muslim brothers and sisters in the
Punjab, were already gearing up for what they did best: making war.20 Thousands of
Pathan tribesmen were raised by former railway guard Khurshid Anwar, described by a
British diplomat as ‘a complete adventurer’, who had made a fortune during the war,
though no one was clear as to how.21 The tribesmen, mostly Afridis and Mahsuds from
the North-West Frontier, tied a bright strip of cloth around their ri es, a sign of their
oaths not to return home until they had avenged the deaths of Muslims in the Punjab.22
In tribal groups, the warriors swept down from the mountains and massed on the
Kashmir border.
British observers were convinced that the government of the North-West Frontier
Province was doing its best to hold Anwar’s tribesmen back, though without much
success. Kashmir, warned Duke, ‘has always been regarded by the lean and hungry
tribesmen of the North West Frontier as a land owing with milk and honey, and if to
the temptation of loot is added the merit of assisting oppressed Muslims the attractions
will be well nigh irresistible’.23 Meanwhile, Pakistani o cials on the borders stopped
the supply of petrol, sugar and other goods to Kashmir. India would allege that the
o cials were acting with the knowledge and consent of the Pakistani government, a
charge Pakistan hotly denied. Either way, according to the British High Commissioner to
Pakistan, the responsibility on the ground lay with Rawalpindi’s District Commissioner,
one Abdul Haq, who ‘appears to be conducting a private war of his own against
Kashmir’ along with his brother, a civil servant in the Ministry of Defence.24
By 20 October, a more public war seemed inevitable. The Maharaja’s troops crossed
the border into Pakistan, and attacked four large villages with mortars, grenades and
automatic re. A British o cer on the scene estimated the casualties at 1750, excluding
those who had been taken to hospital.25 The following night, around 2000 of the massed
tribesmen left Pakistan from the Hazara district of the North-West Frontier Province,
and marched on Kashmir via the Jhelum Valley. Despite extensive research by the
Indian government, the United Nations and independent researchers, no conclusive
evidence has ever been found to con rm Indian suspicions that Jinnah was directing
this invasion.26
The tribesmen headed for Srinagar, sacking towns and villages on the way, and
recruiting local Muslim troops which had deserted from the Kashmir Army. They were
held at Baramula by the Maharaja’s army on 25 October. The result was a massacre,
during which the town was reduced to ashes by Mahsud tribesmen. In their frenzy, the
Mahsuds failed to distinguish between Kashmiri Muslims and Kashmiri ka rs. Among
the dead was a Muslim youth, nailed to a cross in the town square.27 Khurshid Anwar
suggested that the tribesmen stop looting, and consequently lost control of them. The
tribal council spent two days debating whether to have him killed and replaced. This
gave the Maharaja, trembling in Srinagar, time to consider his next move.28

India’s top civil servant, V.P. Menon, was dispatched to Srinagar to speak to the
Maharaja and his Prime Minister. According to the British High Commissioner, Menon
‘so alarmed them that they were convinced that accession to India o ered the only hope
of salvation’.29 The two of them packed up and bolted for Jammu in the small hours of
27 October in a eet of American limousines, leaving no administration in the capital. 30
Public order collapsed. In Delhi, pressure to send troops grew, led by the hawkish
Vallabhbhai Patel. Mountbatten insisted that troops could not be sent in unless Kashmir
formally acceded to India rst. It was a curious condition to demand. Had the Maharaja,
as head of an independent state, asked India to help defend against an invasion, his
action would have been legal. Had India responded to such a call, its action would have
been legal, too.31 Many in Pakistan smelled a rat.
Nehru cabled to Attlee in London: ‘I should like to make it clear that the question of
aiding Kashmir in this emergency is not designed in any way to in uence the state to
accede to India.’32 The integrity of Nehru’s sentiments was undermined when, the very
next day, the Maharaja wrote to Mountbatten agreeing to do just that.33 There is some
muddiness in the evidence as to whether Indian troops were sent in before the
instrument of accession was signed or delivered, and even as to whether it was signed or
delivered at all.34 The original seems to have disappeared from the Indian archives. But
the question of when exactly the Maharaja signed the instrument is a red herring. He
had already deserted his capital by the time he even requested the instrument, and had
lost control of his state. Under such circumstances, it is doubtful that he was still the
Maharaja in any meaningful sense, and whether he had the authority to accede to either
dominion.35 But Nehru’s mind was lled with visions of losing his ancestral state to a
plague of murderous tribesmen. Their faith did not matter to him; their brutality did,
and the thought of yet more destruction, rape and slaughter impelled him to act rashly.
The British High Commissioner in Pakistan telegraphed urgently to London that India
should not accept Kashmir’s accession without a plebiscite, but it was too late.36 Nehru
and Mountbatten accepted the accession, and prepared to fly Indian troops to Kashmir.
The fact of the Maharaja’s personal involvement in genocide was not known in Delhi
at this point, but this cannot entirely excuse Nehru’s action.37 Nehru had spent much of
his adult life excoriating the British for defending ‘princely rights’. The Maharaja’s
antecedents had purchased their territory from a regime that Nehru had long held
illegitimate. He had ruled autocratically over a population, much of which was hostile to
his authority. Nehru would have pointed out that his friend Sheikh Abdullah had also
requested that Indian troops be sent. This is true, but held little weight with the
Pakistani government, which believed Abdullah to be a Congress stooge. Moreover,
Abdullah’s opinion had no impact on India’s legal case for Kashmir, which rested solely
on the flimsy fact of the Maharaja’s acquiescence.
Sam Manekshaw, India’s Director of Military Operations, remembered the meeting
that took place in Delhi at this time. Nehru, as usual, was attempting to contextualize
the Kashmir situation, talking about it in relation to Russia, the United States, the
United Nations and so on. Eventually, Patel exploded: ‘Jawaharlal, do you want
Kashmir, or do you want to give it away?’

‘Of course I want Kashmir,’ replied Nehru.
Before he could add anything else, Patel turned to Manekshaw, and said: ‘You have
your orders.’ It was Patel who went o to All-India Radio and ordered a command
requisitioning private aircraft, and Patel who organized the y-in of Indian troops to
Kashmir the next day. Only later did Mountbatten realize that the Home Minister must
have had the whole operation planned in advance.38
That evening, Ian Stephens dined with the Mountbattens, and ‘was startled by their
one-sided verdicts on a airs’, he wrote. ‘They seemed to have become wholly proHindu.’39 This statement was not fair. Neither Mountbatten nor Nehru saw the situation
in terms of Hindu versus Muslim, but both were profoundly opposed to religious
extremism in any form, and both suspected the worst of Jinnah. Mountbatten told
Stephens that Jinnah was waiting in Abbottabad, ready to drive triumphantly into
Srinagar, ‘where he had hoped to have his breakfast – quite in the fashion of the Kaiser
at the beginning of World War No. 1’, according to the Indian High Commissioner to
Pakistan.40 It has since been shown that Jinnah spent all of late October in Karachi and
Lahore.41
On 27 October, India ew numbers of its 1st Sikh battalion into Srinagar, and these
quickly secured the Vale of Kashmir. ‘If we had vacillated and delayed even by a day,
Srinagar might have been a smoking ruin’, Nehru wrote to his sister Nan, though a
British pilot reporting on the situation in Srinagar that day described it as ‘complete
calm’ when the Indian forces arrived.42 Jinnah took the greatest exception to his archrival Nehru’s actions. Incensed, he ordered Pakistan’s troops in to defend Kashmir
against India, but was persuaded to cancel his order when Auchinleck threatened to
withdraw all British officers from the Pakistan Army.43
The same day, Edwina Mountbatten arrived in Lahore for a tour of refugee camps in
West Punjab. Crossing the Indus, she paused for ve minutes to watch the river
shermen as the sun set. It was, according to her fellow relief worker Richard Symonds,
‘the only time she knocked o on our three day tour’. 44 The rest of the time she spent
visiting camps, talking to refugees, and planning further extractions of supplies from
the government.
The following evening, her party was in Rawalpindi when she was called upon by
General Gracey, acting Commander-in-Chief of the Pakistan Army. Gracey warned
Edwina that war between Pakistan and India might break out at any point. He
confessed that he would probably be required to arrest her, but chivalrously o ered to
take her to dinner rst. She accepted. The following day, she continued to Sialkot, to see
camps where Hindu Kashmiri refugees waited with increasing anxiety to be evacuated to
India. They recounted stories of Muslim atrocities, and a local Sikh o cial told her that
he had seen Pakistani troops in civilian dress crossing into Kashmir.45 That afternoon,
Edwina ew back to Delhi, taking with her a frightening and one-sided view of the
situation to impart to Dickie and Jawahar.
Edwina’s story, based on hearsay, of Pakistani troops being sent into Kashmir would
have con rmed all Jawahar’s worst suspicions. Now Dickie began to worry about the
in uence his wife and Jawahar had over each other. The Mountbattens were overheard

having a row about it: ‘He’s very emotional, very emotional about Kashmir,’ Dickie had
warned her.46 The Kashmir situation was profoundly worsened by the deep and personal
loathing between Nehru and Jinnah. Both men suspected the worst possible motives in
each other. Nehru became convinced that Jinnah had organized and directed the Pathan
tribesmen to invade Kashmir. According to British o cials on the scene, Jinnah was
innocent – though they conceded that the Pakistani government had passively supported
the invasion by keeping local supply routes open.47 But the fact was that Jinnah could
not have stopped the tribesmen, even had he wanted to. To send Pakistan’s army to
ght the Pathans would have provoked a civil war, and that might have excited the
interest of the Afghans and potentially even the Russians. Nor did he have the resources.
Most of the weapons and stocks owed to the Pakistan Army were still in India.48 The
correct course of action would have been for Jinnah to warn Nehru of the tribesmen’s
approach and explain frankly why they could not be stopped; because he did not do
this, Nehru assumed there was a conspiracy.
Similarly, Nehru failed to inform Jinnah that the Maharaja had asked for help and
that he was sending troops. As a result, Jinnah became convinced that Nehru had meant
all along for Kashmir to be dragged into India by force.49 Yet as late as 28 October,
Nehru wrote in a private letter to Nan: ‘For my part, I do not mind if Kashmir becomes
more or less independent, but it would have been a cruel blow if it had become just an
exploited part of Pakistan.’50
Mountbatten attempted to resolve this situation by arranging a meeting between
himself, Nehru, Patel, Liaquat and Jinnah in Delhi. Edwina told a reporter over whiskies
and ginger that, ‘You can solve any problem if you work as pals,’ and her husband
agreed.51 But friendly sentiment was in short supply. Jinnah refused to come to Delhi;
Patel refused to leave. Instead, it was agreed that Mountbatten and Nehru would go to
Lahore – a concession which Mountbatten only managed to get the Indian cabinet to
allow by not telling his ministers that Jinnah had forced it on to him.52 The talks were
fixed for 1 November.
It was not to be. On the afternoon of 31 October, the Pakistani government issued a
lengthy and provocative press release, accusing the Maharaja and Sheikh Abdullah of
‘conspiring’ with the Indians, while refusing its own overtures of ‘friendly co-operation’.
Moreover, it alleged, the Indian government had deliberately used the tribesmen’s
incursion to justify ‘the pre-planned scheme for the accession of Kashmir by India troops
with the object of holding down the people of Kashmir who have been driven to
rebellion by this well-calculated and carefully planned oppression.’53 Lord Ismay arrived
at the British High Commission in Delhi at midnight to inform the High Commissioner,
Sir Terence Shone, that Nehru would not be going to Lahore after all. Shone reported to
the Commonwealth Relations O ce that Mountbatten ‘has no doubt that this decision is
right since [the] Indian Cabinet feel so strongly on this matter that if Nehru were to
insist on going in the face of this gross defamation he would undoubtedly be thrown
out.’54
At a more reasonable hour of that morning, Mountbatten telephoned Jinnah and told
him that Nehru was unwell.55 Mountbatten turned up in Lahore alone, with no power to

negotiate a settlement. Consequently, the talks were of little use, and the main result of
them seems to have been that the rankling dislike of the Governors-General for each
other increased. Both left the meeting with a new distrust of the other’s motives:
Mountbatten believing that Jinnah was directing the raiders, and Jinnah believing that
Mountbatten was directing the Indian Army.56
Just three days later, the Pakistan Times reported that Mountbatten – whom it
described in an epithet both politically and factually incorrect as ‘conqueror of the Japs’
– was commanding operations for India in Kashmir. Any Pakistani o cers familiar with
Mountbatten’s record as an operational commander might well have started planning
their victory party, but the implication was that Mountbatten represented Britain, and
therefore that Britain was siding with India. ‘The military colossus of the Government of
India and the best British Generals and Commanders are, therefore, cooperating to crush
a tiny half-organised ill-equipped and General-less force of [sic] the people of Kashmir
have mustered’, it said.57 Sir Laurence Gra tey-Smith and Duke, the two most senior
British diplomats in Pakistan, both worried that Mountbatten’s position and attitude
were stirring up ‘anti-British feeling’.58
In all the calamities of Pakistan’s young life, the hand of Dickie could be detected: the
mysterious delay in the publication of the Radcli e award; the failure to arrest known
Sikh troublemakers just before partition; and now the accession of Kashmir to India. The
Pakistani Minister of Finance o ered Gra tey-Smith his acid congratulations on
Britain’s ‘latest victory over Pakistan’. More and more Pakistanis were beginning to
believe that the British government ‘are led by the nose by Lord Mountbatten, who is
himself led by the nose by Mr. Nehru, who in his turn, is frightened of Mr. Patel,
Pakistan’s greatest individual enemy.’ He may as well have added, as plenty of
commentators later would, an extra link in the chain: Lady Mountbatten, occupying an
unde ned position between her husband and the Prime Minister. ‘We have so long been
the “Aunt Sally” of politics in India that our reappearance in that role is hardly
surprising’, wrote Grafftey-Smith resignedly. ‘But it is regrettable.’59
In Kashmir, ghting had spread to Uri at the mouth of the valley, and into the southwest.60 On 5 November, 120 trucks mysteriously arrived in the city of Jammu. Local
Muslims were rounded up and told that they would be taken to the Pakistan border,
then released across it. Five thousand civilian men, women and children complied and
got into the trucks. Instead of driving to the border, the trucks turned the other way, and
took the Muslims further into the heart of Jammu. The convoy halted, the guards got
out, and then, with machine guns and blades, massacred their charges. A few hundred
escaped by hiding in fields or canals. The rest were killed.61
The physical temperature was steadily dropping. By December, the valley and
surrounding hills would be icebound. Supplies to the Indian Army were already falling
short. The Indian Army’s Sikh troops were becoming restive, and it was rumoured that
they had demanded a Sikh state, to include Amritsar, Simla and the East Punjab. The
Maharaja of Patiala was said to be encouraging the scheme.62 Against this Sikh objective

was the similarly aggressive ambition of the Pathan tribesmen. Sydney Smith, a reporter
for the Daily Express who had managed to get himself kidnapped by Pathans near
Baramula, con rmed on his release that tribal leaders chanted prayers every night for
the success of their jihad against the Sikhs. ‘Every tribal leader agrees on the war aims’,
wrote Smith. ‘They are: To wipe out Sir Hari Singh’s minority rule in Kashmir; to march
on and exterminate the chief Sikh State, Patiala; to capture Amritsar and try – one day –
to reach New Delhi.’63
Kashmir was becoming another chapter in the centuries-long story of con ict between
Sikhs and Pathans for control of the North-West Frontier. As a result, Nehru was being
pushed into an ever more militant position by his cabinet’s fears that a soft response to
Muslim incursions in Kashmir would trigger more communal riots across India.
Mountbatten, though he did advise military operations, became increasingly desperate
to rein Nehru in. At a defence committee meeting on 4 November, Mountbatten advised
strongly against sending India’s Sikh troops into Muslim areas of Mirpur and Poonch,
even for ‘liberation purposes’. He pointed out that, in such areas, it would be impossible
to distinguish between hostile persons and friends, and that it was likely that the army
would make mistakes and aggravate the situation. Instead, the Indian government
should nd a way of stopping the ghting through communication with the Pakistani
government.64
But Mountbatten would not be around to supervise the Indian Army at this crucial
point, for he had already accepted an invitation to y back to Britain with Edwina for
his nephew’s royal wedding. He had originally hoped to have Nehru come with them,
though that was untenable now; Patel, on the other hand, had been conspicuously
encouraging of the Governor General’s little break away from India.65 Edwina was
appalled that they might leave India in a state of acute crisis. She hated the thought of
being dragged away from her relief work and, as she con ded to Alan CampbellJohnson, was ‘concerned about the construction that might be put on their departure to
London’. She suggested cancelling the trip, but Campbell-Johnson talked her out of it on
the grounds that to do so would be to acknowledge that there was a problem.66
For some weeks, Edwina had been feeling that Dickie did not live up to the obsessive
pace she set. She had been in Amritsar for a conference with the refugee commissioner
and the military when news came through that her elder daughter, Patricia, had given
birth to a baby boy. ‘I gathered that I was a Grandmama and that you were both
ourishing and that Daddy was at the Chief’s House playing roulette!’ she wrote to her.
‘Very 1947!! Women work and men play!’67 The joke was not light-hearted. Edwina was
now working an average of eighteen hours a day. Dickie still seemed to be able to t in
riding, exercise, genealogy and regular massages. Tension between the two of them ran
high, and the ghts grew more serious. On 10 November, they got back on their plane
for the two-day journey to London, Edwina still full of misgivings.
With the Mountbattens out of the way, Nehru’s rst action was to take his longthreatened trip to Kashmir. On 12 November, he addressed a meeting at Srinagar: ‘I

pledge before you on behalf of myself and the people of India that we – India and
Kashmir – shall ever remain together.’68 He wrote at length to Attlee of hospitals,
convents and libraries ransacked. ‘I saw large numbers of Muslim women with their ears
torn, because their earrings had been pulled out,’ he stated, implying that the raiders
were responsible. ‘The population of Kashmir Valley, which is chie y Muslim, complain
bitterly of this outrageous behaviour and begged us to continue to protect them.’69
The Mountbattens arrived back in London that same day, and embarked upon a urry
of social and political events. In private Edwina was unable to disguise how furious she
was with her husband, and they had a series of rows. She insisted on seeing her former
lover, Malcolm Sargent, on one of the two nights they would have had together at
Broadlands.70 Mountbatten went to see Churchill, and had a ght with him, too.
Churchill patted him on the back, gave him a glass of port and a cigar, and then told
him categorically that his sending British soldiers ‘to crush and oppress the Muslims in
Kashmir’ was an act of gross betrayal. He described Nehru and Patel as ‘enemies of
Britain’, and the Muslims as Britain’s allies; and accused Mountbatten of planning and
organizing ‘the rst victory of Hindustan’ (he refused to call it India) ‘against Pakistan’.
Churchill told Mountbatten that he should leave India, ‘and not involve the King and my
country in further backing traitors’.71
The King and Queen hosted pre-wedding parties, which the Mountbattens attended.
‘The most lovely sight I have ever seen’, wrote Noël Coward, enchanted by the sight of
Buckingham Palace full of glittering celebrities in full evening dress and decorations.
‘Everyone looking shiny and happy; something indestructible.’72 The following day saw
an afternoon party at St James’s Palace so that guests could view the thousands of
wedding presents. Members of the public had already been permitted to admire them, at
a shilling a peek; everything from a 175-piece porcelain dinner service from the Chiang
Kai-sheks, to a gold tiara from Haile Selassie, to dozens of pairs of nylon stockings sent
in by ordinary people. Mountbatten had brought the present that excited the most
comment – a fringed piece of khadi spun by Gandhi on his own spinning wheel. ‘Such
an indelicate gift,’ thundered Queen Mary, apparently under the impression that the
Mahatma had sent Princess Elizabeth his loincloth.73
That evening, Dickie attended his nephew’s stag night at the Dorchester Hotel. The
twelve men present drank sherry, champagne, port and beer, and afterwards cheerfully
assaulted some photographers, ripping their cameras o them and throwing ashbulbs
so that they exploded with loud bangs against the wall.74 The next morning, 20
November, 2000 people – and one Pekingese dog, hidden in Lady Munnings’s mu –
packed into Westminster Abbey.75 The crowned heads of Europe sat in the sacrarium,
with Dickie and Edwina in pride of place. They had arrived looking handsome, the full
Mountbatten wattage disguising the frosty state of their private relationship. Churchill
walked in, ‘his beaming smile almost as broad as his waistline’, according to Leo Amery;
‘rather looking as if the whole thing were his own show and he the genial parent or
godparent of the Bride … The contrast between him and Attlee, trying to look as if he
wasn’t there, very striking.’76

The bride, in ivory silk and 10,000 pearls, walked down the aisle to join her tall,
blond and apparently not too hungover groom at the altar. A full traditional ceremony
followed, during which the future Queen promised to obey her husband. He had been
created Duke of Edinburgh the day before, so that his wife need not su er the name Mrs
Philip Mountbatten.77 It had been reported that the Edinburghs were thinking of joining
Uncle Dickie in India for their honeymoon, though in view of the situation there by
November 1947 it is probably fortunate that this came to nothing.78 Instead, they had a
week at Broadlands, beleaguered by a phalanx of royal watchers, who followed them
into the local town, lurked in the shrubbery, and even queued outside the church after
services to have a go at sitting in the seats warmed by the royal couple.79
The Mountbattens ew back to India on 24 November. Much had happened during
their vacation. Liaquat Ali Khan stated that Pakistan wanted to refer the Kashmir issue
to the United Nations. Jawaharlal Nehru charged high Pakistani o cials with inciting
the tribesmen in Kashmir. A force of Afghans from Khost crossed the border into
Kashmir, reportedly armed with Russian equipment.80 The President of the Congress
Party, J.B. Kripalani, resigned in fear of an imminent war between India and Pakistan.
Mountbatten was horri ed. Without his steadying hand, the Indian Army had moved
into militant action; it did not stretch the imagination to work out that this might have
been precisely the reason Patel was so keen for him to go away. Just before he had left
for London, he had reluctantly authorized Indian columns to move to Mirpur and
Poonch, for the sole purpose of relieving the garrisons already there. ‘During my
absence in London this object changed’, he wrote to Nehru. ‘It then evidently became the
purpose of the Government of India to attempt to impose their military will on the
Poonch and Mirpur areas.’ He protested that the inhabitants were mostly Muslim, and
reminded Nehru that it would be ‘morally unjusti able’ to use force to coerce them into
India.81
Immediately after stepping o the plane, Edwina, whose fears about leaving India
had been proven right, went o to see Gandhi, and then Amrit Kaur. But there was no
doubt about who she wanted to see most: it was Jawahar. More or less every day she
saw or spoke to him now. The Government House diaries reveal the two of them
meeting for dinner on 2 December, at his home on 3 December, at hers on 4 December,
and so on throughout the winter. Soon, she was happy enough to be kind to Dickie
again. ‘Thanks for being so sweet and understanding during these days in England’, she
wrote, though she had the note sent round to his room by a servant rather than taking it
to him herself.82 On her forty-sixth birthday, she took the afternoon o for a visit to the
Taj Mahal, the world’s greatest monument to love in sparkling white marble and
lapidary, built by the heartbroken Shah Jahan in memory of his wife, Mumtaz.83
At the end of November, Dickie ew his mistress, Yola Letellier, out to Delhi. Edwina
invited Malcolm Sargent, and ignored him. ‘I fear I’ve hardly set eyes on them’, wrote
Edwina of their guests.84 Her friendships with Jawahar and Gandhi cast her London
friends in the shade. During her friends’ visits, she kept up the regular trips to Jawahar’s
house in York Road. For both Edwina and Jawahar, it was the ideal relationship. Only
in each other’s company could the two of them relax and lose themselves in endless

conversations.85 Their talks were almost always about ideas rather than gossip, but were
never dry or sterile. Ideas were what made them passionate. In their romantic lives,
Jawahar and Edwina alike had always sought intimacy without su ocation. With each
other, they found it.
According to Nehru’s secretary, M.O. Mathai, Nehru paid a brief visit to Lucknow in
the winter of that year. Sarojini Naidu was then the Governor of the United Provinces,
and a rumour spread that Nehru was in Lucknow to propose to his old girlfriend,
Sarojini’s daughter Padmaja Naidu. Padmaja was ecstatic, and prepared herself to
accept. When Jawahar turned up, he was with Edwina. Padmaja locked herself in a
room and refused to meet the Governor General’s wife.86 Later, when Padmaja came to
stay with him, Jawahar would nd one of his framed photographs of Edwina smashed
on the floor.87
On Kashmir, Nehru’s attitude was hardening, and he appeared to be losing interest in
holding a plebiscite.88 On 6 December, he went again to the state and met the
Maharaja’s son – ‘a very bright boy’, he told Indira.89 Mountbatten had desperately
attempted to stop him from going.90 Edwina’s friends Richard Symonds and Horace
Alexander, both relief workers, had paid a lengthy visit to Kashmir and afterwards sent
Nehru a report. Symonds had described the conditions in Poonch, where the inhabitants
had revolted against the Maharaja of Kashmir back in September or October, apparently
before the Pathan raiders invaded. Nehru was furious, for the existence of a prior revolt
would strengthen Pakistan’s argument that the raiders had responded to a cry for help
from oppressed Kashmiri Muslims. ‘I don’t care a damn what happens to Poonch,’ he
shouted. ‘They can go to Pakistan or Hell for all I care.’ Symonds and Alexander passed
on suggestions made to them by Liaquat – that all non-Kashmiri troops should be
removed from Kashmir, and replaced by a temporary United Nations government,
pending a plebiscite. This made matters worse. ‘These people do not deserve to be
listened to. They have behaved disgustingly and I will not have’ – as he banged on the
table three times with his fist – ‘a single Pakistani soldier in Kashmir.’91
Mountbatten, too, was beginning to think about calling in the international
arbitrator. When Liaquat and Nehru met on 8 December, they argued for ve hours
straight before a pained Mountbatten interrupted them and begged them to telegraph
the United Nations Security Council and get a team sent over immediately.92 Nehru was
reluctant to accept United Nations involvement. Just a week before, the UN had voted
to partition Palestine between Arabs and Jews. Trouble had ared immediately in
Damascus, Jenin, Tel Aviv, Acre and Nablus. Nehru did not see that the UN’s roles of
peacekeeping or supervising a plebiscite were relevant until there was a peace to keep;
in the meantime, a reference to the UN would involve admitting that the situation was
one of war between India and Pakistan.93 His attitude came in for much criticism. In a
moment of irritation, the British High Commissioner in Karachi would write that ‘We
seem to be faced with a choice between what may be loosely described as natural justice
and the appeasement of one man who, since he is himself a Kashmiri pundit, is blinded
to realities by emotions passionately involved.’ For this, he earned a swift reprimand
from Attlee.94

On 12 December, India and Pakistan nally announced an agreement on the partition
of their assets. Pakistan was to get 750 million rupees of British India’s sterling assets
and cash balances (slightly less than one- fth of the total), one-third of its military
stocks, and 17.5 per cent of its liabilities. It was good news for the ailing dominion and
its ailing leader. Just two weeks before, it had been reported that Jinnah had been
bedridden secretly for a month. No details of his illness were disclosed.95 ‘I understand
that he is now living on the edge of a nervous breakdown,’ reported the British High
Commissioner to Pakistan.96 Nehru’s friend Sri Prakasa, the Indian High Commissioner
to Pakistan, sent him a long report on the situation in Karachi. While Jinnah was ‘not
quite a broken man as he was reported to be, he is not himself now and he has become
extraordinarily sensitive’, Prakasa noted. The sensitivity was not surprising, bearing in
mind that Prakasa had heard of three separate attempts to assassinate Jinnah, all of
which had been kept from the press. Some said the plotters were Sikhs. Others said they
were Punjabi Muslims, angry at what they perceived as Jinnah’s abandonment of them
in the Indian Punjab. Either way, the last attempt had been ‘particularly nasty’. The
would-be assassins had broken into Jinnah’s compound, killing one guard and seriously
injuring another. Prakasa described Jinnah as increasingly isolated – not just by his
illness, but also by his attitude. He took no advice, except from one person. ‘I am almost
inclined to think that his sister, Miss Fatima, is his evil genius.’97
The British High Commissioner, Sir Laurence Gra tey-Smith, went to see Jinnah
shortly after this, and found that, though ‘wispily frail in body’, the ‘ re of his fanatical
ardour is certainly in no way diminished’. Jinnah harangued him with regard to his
bugbear, ‘which has now acquired the strength of an obsession’ – that the person most
responsible for the disaster of partition was Dickie Mountbatten.98
Mountbatten, meanwhile, permitted himself a brief escape from the vicissitudes of Delhi
life. On 12 December, he ew with Edwina and Yola to Jaipur, one of India’s most
beautiful cities, a pink sandstone metropolis set in the heart of princely Rajputana. They
stayed with the Maharaja, whose silver jubilee they were to celebrate. He had succeeded
to the throne at the age of eleven, since which time he had ruled over three million
people. His glamorous Maharani had been Tatler magazine’s cover girl just ve months
before, was said to be very Western-minded, and played tennis with the Queen when
she was in London.99 Dickie and Edwina stayed at the Rambagh Palace, a huge and
spectacular estate. They watched a lot of polo, and attended a lot of banquets; Edwina
was taken to visit schools, and Dickie to shoot ducks. At his jubilee durbar the Maharaja
walked barefoot across the palace grounds, wearing garlands of owers and a white
plume held in place by a sumptuously jewelled turban ornament. The Mountbattens
followed: Dickie in full dress uniform, Edwina in lamé with a coronet of laurel leaves
and ve strands of pearls.100 Afterwards, the Maharaja gave a very nice speech about
Dickie, crediting him with waging all sorts of battles in Burma.101
From Jaipur, the Mountbattens ew on to Bombay; he to visit soldiers, she to visit

refugee camps and women’s organizations. They returned to Delhi on 18 December to
nd that, once again, problems had blown up in their absence. Patel had ordered a
freeze on 550 million rupees (£40 million) of Pakistan’s sterling assets, on the grounds
that it would be used to arm invaders of ‘Indian territory’ in Kashmir. Jinnah and
Liaquat were furious. The Pakistani treasury had only 20 million rupees left in it, and
they were facing a serious nancial crisis.102 Mountbatten presided over another
hopeless meeting in New Delhi on 21 and 22 December, at which Liaquat and Nehru
reached a complete deadlock. After sustained lobbying, Mountbatten persuaded Nehru
to refer the Kashmir problem to the United Nations – a concession which he considered a
great achievement, for ‘Nehru has been as temperamental and di cult over the Kashmir
issue as he [had] ever known him’.103 To Mountbatten’s horror, Nehru had begun to talk
of sending Indian troops into Pakistan to take out the ‘nerve centres’ from which raiders
were being sent. The friendship between Dickie and Jawahar, recently so cordial, was
rapidly souring. Jawahar’s relationship with Edwina remained strong, but even she
could not always lift his despair. ‘I am afraid I have had no peace whatever for an age’,
he wrote, ‘and I think rather longingly sometimes of the quiet days I had in prison.’104
On 25 December, Jinnah celebrated Christmas with a Pakistani Christian
community.105 In Delhi, Mountbatten spent it writing Nehru an extremely long and
agonized letter about Kashmir. ‘I have never and will never from my experience of war
subscribe to the view that the operations which are now starting to take place are
anything but of the most dangerous and risky character,’ he declared. Correctly, he
pointed out that the modern weapons and great resources of India counted for nothing
in the face of guerrilla warfare. ‘The raiders with the local population on their side can
take on our forces at their will. This process is bound to wear down our army and our
resources.’ He deplored the possibility of sending Indian troops into Pakistan in the
frankest terms: ‘Each time I have heard you say it I have been more and more appalled.’
He predicted that it would lead to war between India and Pakistan, and observed that
the idea that such a war ‘could be con ned to the sub-Continent, or nished o quickly
in favour of India without further complication, is to my mind a fatal illusion.’ He
reiterated the need to call in the United Nations, but the most striking message to
emerge from the letter was the simplest. Several times, he repeated and underlined the
phrase ‘stop the fighting’.106
Nehru replied the next day. ‘We have not started the ghting,’ he protested. ‘I am
convinced that the whole of this business has been very carefully planned on an
extensive scale.’ After Kashmir, he wrote, the next objective would be Patiala; then the
East Punjab; then Delhi itself. ‘On to Delhi is the cry all over West Punjab.’107
The Mountbattens had been due to set o on another trip to Gwalior. By the time
Dickie received Nehru’s letter, and panicked, he considered the hour too late to cancel,
though he believed that there was an immediate danger of war between India and
Pakistan. He had been furious when Attlee threatened to have him superseded as
Viceroy. Now it was he who sent a message to Attlee begging him to come out
personally and take the crisis out of his hands.108 Attlee refused to do so.109
Mountbatten also asked Nehru to contact Attlee with a full report on Kashmir – though

Nehru, again struck down with a cold at an inopportune moment, was con ned to his
bed and could not. Attlee sent him a sternly worded message telling him not to move
forces into Pakistan, even if he thought such an action would constitute self-defence. ‘I
am gravely disturbed by your assumption that India would be within her rights in
international law’, he wrote. Moreover, Indian hopes for a quick and sharp campaign
were ‘very optimistic … all military history goes to shew how di cult it is to deal with
the tribes of the N.W. Frontier’.110
While these debates were going on, India began to drop half-ton bombs on Pathan
tribes along the 500-mile front of Kashmir’s southwest. Within India, the government’s
standing was precarious. There was a strike by half a million textile and industrial
workers on 29 December, and a riot led by communist students against Congress in
Bombay two days later. Finally, on the very last day of 1947, Nehru gave in to
Mountbatten’s persuasion and instructed the Indian ambassador in Washington to
submit an appeal to the UN Security Council.111 In under ve months, the two nations
of India and Pakistan had embroiled themselves in an irresolvable war.

CHAPTER 18: MAYBE NOT TODAY, MAYBE NOT TOMORROW

beginning of December, Edwina’s friend Richard
AFTER NEHRU HAD SHOUTED AT HIM OVER POONCH AT THE
Symonds had been struck down with typhoid. Gandhi had taken him in at Birla House to
convalesce, and G.D. Birla himself had slipped him brandy behind the Mahatma’s back.
Symonds had been visited by Patel, with gentle words; Gandhi, ‘more charming &
amusing than I have ever known him’; and Nehru himself, contrite after his outburst,
‘twirling & sni ng at one deep red rose, like Ferdinand the Bull’. Gandhi had invited
some Christian women to decorate Symonds’s room for Christmas, which they did with
great enthusiasm. Unfortunately, all the baubles, streamers and tinsel were tied to the
ceiling fan and, when the Pakistani High Commissioner turned up to talk about
Kashmir, he had become so involved in his grievances that he accidentally switched it
on.1
The High Commissioner’s ceiling fan disaster was an apt metaphor for the political
situation as a whole. So worked up had the politicians on both sides become about the
details of who had acceded when, and which soldiers had been sent in where, that they
had accidentally set o one of the most serious ongoing security crises in history.
Mountbatten’s state of open desperation by the end of 1947 demonstrated that he, at
least, had begun to realize the full magnitude of what had been unleashed. His
insistence on taking the Kashmir issue to the United Nations had been based on two
sincere beliefs: rst, that con ict between India and Pakistan would escalate; and
second, that the better option was to cool the governments down and persuade them to
talk. He was right on the rst point. When the UN Security Council met in January, it
observed that the danger of an imminent attack by India on Pakistan from the East
Punjab was ‘clearly acute’.2 Meanwhile, the British High Commissioner in Karachi
observed that any invasion by India would ‘uncork a Jehad’ in retaliation.3
On the second point, though, the decision to involve the United Nations was
problematic. The Indian government was not prepared to talk, except about how much
blame should be put on Pakistan for aiding the tribesmen.4 But, if the Security Council
adopted a resolution blaming the Pakistani government, India might order a full
invasion of Pakistan. The best chance of peace, it considered, was to persuade Pakistan
to call o the tribesmen; but Pakistan would not do so unless the safety of Muslims in
Kashmir could be guaranteed.5 The UN would have to send in a neutral peacekeeping
force – and the only troops who had knowledge of the language and the terrain were
British.6 The British government reacted to the suggestion that it might put its soldiers
back into the subcontinent with abject horror.7
Rather than calming the two dominions down, the chance to air their grievances at
enormous length on the international stage would rile them up.8 Attlee telegraphed his

most important ambassadors on 10 January to emphasize that under no circumstances
should they allow Pakistan to think they were siding with India, because ‘In view of
Palestine situation this would carry the risk of aligning the whole of Islam against us.’9
Attlee’s fears were prescient. Israel was due to become an independent state on 14
May, prompting an immediate response characterized by the Pakistani newspaper Light.
Under the headline ‘America’s challenge to Islam’, the Light contrasted Washington’s
refusal to recognize Pakistani Kashmir with its keenness to recognize the state of Israel.
The article described the United States’ backing for Israel against the Arabs as ‘the rst
link in the chain of planned acts of hostility’ against Islam, and regretted that its
policies were pitting Islam against its natural ally, democracy.10
In fact, Britain e ectively did side with Pakistan. The British delegation at the UN was
scrupulous in its insistence that India and Pakistan both had valid claims to the
territory, and heavy in its implication that the Muslim majority in Kashmir gave
Pakistan the edge.11 But in India, as well as in Pakistan, the retreat of the British left a
new world superpower to take the blame. According to Mountbatten, by the end of
January, Nehru was describing the UN as ‘an American racket’.12
Kashmir was threatening to become a major focus for the Cold War. On 13 January,
the British Ambassador in Moscow reported that the Russians suspected that Britain had
made a secret military agreement with Pakistan. The Soviet press claimed openly that
Britain was ‘inciting Pakistan to seize Kashmir’.13 It was an easy accusation to make, for
the armies of India and Pakistan were still to a signi cant extent commanded by British
o cers. Dickie Mountbatten was not the only serviceman whose position had become
awkward, and the absurdity of the situation soon threatened mutinies. Sta ord Cripps
alerted Attlee to a private letter from the Royal Indian Air Force’s Air Marshal T.W.
Elmhirst, who stated frankly that he would resign if sent to ght the Pakistanis in
Kashmir. ‘I am not prepared to command the King’s Indian Air Force to battle against
the King’s Pakistan Air Force commanded by a friend of mine,’ he wrote. ‘It’s quite time
H.M.G. took a rm line.’14 London had issued a stern warning that no British o cers
were to serve in Kashmir, but many of the men in question felt strong personal ties to
their fellow soldiers and loyalty to the dominion they served. It was impossible to stop
them working from the sidelines. Richard Symonds, who served on the United Nations
commission in Kashmir after he recovered from his illness, described a farcical situation.
The British Commanders-in-Chief of the Indian and Pakistani forces would ring each
other up as if they were arranging a tea-party: ‘If you bomb this,’ they would say, ‘we
shall shell that.’15
The last four months of 1947 had witnessed a spectacular revival in the popularity of
Mohandas Gandhi in political circles. With his image boosted by the success of his fast in
Calcutta and ministrations in Delhi, he had resumed his role as a guru to many of the
leading lights of the Indian government. Despite this renewed demand for his spiritual
leadership, the Mahatma himself remained disconsolate. ‘I must achieve something or
die in the attempt’, he wrote.16 Stories of communal outrages distressed him; the

presence of armed police and the military in Delhi horri ed him. ‘Votaries of nonviolence today have had to put their trust in the weapons of violence’, he observed.
‘What a severe test it is going to be for us.’17 But both Nehru and Patel made daily
pilgrimages to his sparse, airy chamber in the opulent Birla House.
To the distress of Gandhi, Nehru and Patel – never the best of friends – were
developing a deep antipathy towards each other, splitting and stalling the government.
Patel viewed Nehru’s scrupulously unjudgemental treatment of India’s remaining
Muslims as indulgent and dangerous to national security. He also resented Nehru’s
attempts to root out the Hindu nationalists of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS),
describing them as ‘patriots who love their country’.18 Many observers thought that,
once the freedom struggle was over, Congress should have split.19 A strong right wing
under Patel, and a strong left wing under Nehru, might have produced a balanced twoparty system. But Congress stayed together, united more by sentimentality than by a
common political goal. When Patel chose Hindu nationalist Purshottam Das Tandon for
Congress President, a man who openly supported an aggressive policy towards Pakistan
and opposed industrialization, many of Nehru’s usual supporters walked out of the party
in protest. Nehru was isolated, and Patel had placed himself at the centre of the party,
with the interests of the landowning and industrial elite behind him.20 On 6 January,
Nehru told Gandhi that he had reached an impasse. Either Patel had to go, or he would.
One week later, to the surprise of even his closest intimates, Gandhi embarked upon
his nal fast. Before, he had always discussed the intention to fast at great length; the
period of warning and discussion had been an essential part of the tactic. This time,
both Nehru and Patel had seen him in the morning before the fast began, and Gandhi
had said not a word. The only member of the government he told was Amrit Kaur. Amrit
con ded to a member of the British High Commission’s sta that she thought it would
really be the fast unto death at last. The aged Mahatma could not hope to live for more
than ve or six days without sustenance. Ostensibly, Gandhi was fasting to stop Hindus
attacking Muslims in Delhi. ‘Other sources suggest that the fast is due to the bad state of
relations between Nehru and Patel which they say have been worse during the last week
than ever before,’ noted the British High Commissioner. ‘Gandhi hopes that his fast will
rally mass public opinion to Nehru’s more liberal views.’21
Gandhi slept on a cot in Birla House while the public led past to observe him.22 The
Mountbattens were in Bikaner for another princely visit, though the Maharaja cancelled
the state banquet out of respect for Gandhi’s fast. When they returned to Delhi, Edwina
took Dickie with her to visit Gandhi for the rst time. Previously, the Mahatma had
always come to see him. ‘It takes a fast to bring you to me!’ exclaimed Gandhi with a
twinkle in his eye.23 Though his sense of humour remained, Gandhi seemed so weak
that, as she left, Edwina wept. Jawahar also came to visit Gandhi that day; he, too,
could not hold back tears. When he heard a crowd of refugees outside Birla House
chanting, ‘Let Gandhi die!’ Jawahar’s sorrow turned to fury. ‘How dare you say these
words!’ he shouted, running at the protesters. ‘Come and kill me rst!’ The cowards
scattered.24

Patel had been unmovable on the question of unfreezing the 550 million rupees that
India still owed to Pakistan, and Nehru was unwilling to challenge his cabinet on the
issue. Mountbatten claimed that he had told Gandhi the situation, at which point Gandhi
o ered to fast. ‘And they were terribly upset that he’d agreed to this – terribly upset that
he’d done it with me and not with them,’ Mountbatten remembered. ‘And he got them
absolutely by the short hairs; they had to give up.’25 This latter-day reminiscence of
Mountbatten’s is contradicted by his own report of 3 February 1948, in which he admits
that he, too, had only been told about Gandhi’s fast at the last minute, that the reason
for it ‘will, I think, forever remain a mystery’, and that Gandhi had come up with the
scheme ‘without consulting me’.26 Still, it is true that, during one of Nehru’s visits,
Gandhi asked him to pay Pakistan its due. Without hesitation, Nehru ordered it to be
done. The cabinet, though reluctant, could not disobey a direct request from the ailing
Mahatma, whose political influence at last matched his moral influence.27
As it had in Calcutta, Gandhi’s fast brought results from the people at large as well as
the government. Representatives from across Delhi sent assurances that Muslim life,
property and religion in Delhi would be respected. Nehru brought the messages to the
Mahatma’s cot and, on 18 January, Gandhi gave up his fast. Together with the Muslim
minister Abul Kalam Azad, Nehru took turns to feed the old man fruit juice.
Quickly Gandhi recovered his strength, but not his optimism. ‘India will virtually
become a prison if the present conditions continue,’ he said on breaking his fast. ‘It may
be better that you allow me to continue my fast and if God wills it He will call me.’28
Two days later, he was addressing his daily prayer meeting in the grounds of Birla
House when a bomb exploded only yards away. Both Jawahar and Edwina rushed to the
scene, but found Gandhi unhurt and un ustered, declaring that he had merely thought
the army must have been at work nearby.29 Edwina congratulated him on his cool
response, but Gandhi was modest. ‘If somebody red at me point blank and I faced his
bullet with a smile, repeating the name of Rama in my heart,’ Gandhi told her, ‘I should
be deserving of congratulations.’30
The bomb-thrower was a young Hindu refugee from West Punjab, caught in the act of
lighting the fuse; he also had a live grenade on him. The police suspected that he was
not acting alone. Rumours were rife about an extreme Hindu nationalist group from
Bombay who saw Gandhi as the betrayer of Hinduism, and who had been in amed by
his e orts to save Muslim lives. Yet Gandhi refused any extra security at prayer
meetings – except for demanding that every Hindu or Sikh brought a Muslim friend.31
On 23 January, the Mountbattens left for a tour of Bhopal, Nagpur and Madras. The
atmosphere remained tense, and in Amritsar a wild protest trampled the national ag
into the dirt. Three days after the incident, on 29 January, Nehru spoke in Amritsar
district, his voice shaking with passionate anger as he denounced the action as
traitorous, and communal organizations such as the RSS as un t for India’s greatness. A
non-Muslim member of his audience was arrested for carrying two hand grenades.32 On
the morning of 30 January, Margaret Bourke-White went to interview Gandhi, and
found him deeply depressed. ‘I can no longer live in darkness and madness,’ he
murmured. ‘I cannot continue.’ Later, he was visited by Betty Hutheesing, Indira Gandhi

and Padmaja Naidu, bringing with them Indira’s four-year-old son, Rajiv. While the
adults talked and joked, Rajiv played with some jasmine owers that had been brought
for Gandhi. He wrapped them around the old man’s feet, but was stopped with a gentle
hand. ‘You must not do that,’ said the Mahatma. ‘One only puts owers around dead
people’s feet.’33
That afternoon, Gandhi shared a meal of goat’s milk, vegetables and oranges with
Vallabhbhai and Maniben Patel. He got up and, supported by his grand-nieces Abha and
Manu, walked down the colonnade that ran from outside his ground- oor quarters to
the large and beautiful back garden of Birla House. He was about ten minutes late for
the prayer meeting that day, and a crowd of around ve hundred had gathered. As he
walked through the bowing attendees towards his platform at the centre of the garden,
a young man stepped out and pressed his palms together, with the traditional Hindi
greeting, ‘Namaste.’ Manu caught his hand to move him out of Gandhi’s way, but he
pushed her over. The man looked Gandhi in the eyes, pulled out a Beretta pistol, and
red three shots pointblank into the Mahatma’s chest. ‘He Ram’ – ‘Oh Rama’ – Gandhi
was heard to say as he sank to the ground.
Immediately, there was chaos. As Gandhi was cradled by his devotees and carried
back to the house, the assassin was seized and pummelled by thirty-two-year-old
diplomatic o cer Herbert Reiner of Springdale, Connecticut. 34 A doctor was found
within minutes, but he was no use. Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi was dead.
Crimson blood spread across Gandhi’s white shawl, and the news spread through Delhi
nearly as fast. Betty Hutheesing had gone on to a friend’s house, and asked her Muslim
driver to take her home. The driver began to tremble and could hardly start the car. ‘My
God, I hope it wasn’t a Muslim,’ he said.35 It was not. The murderer was Nathuram
Godse, a Bombay Brahmin and member of the fundamentalist Hindu Mahasabha, an
organization linked to the same RSS that Patel had recently endorsed so glowingly. He
and his co-conspirator, Narayan Apte, had bonded over a shared hatred of Muslims, and
love of detective novels: Apte preferred Agatha Christie, while Godse’s favourite was
Erle Stanley Gardner.36 Godse was unpenitent for the murder of Gandhi, and asked that
no mercy be shown to him. After a trial a few months later, he would be hanged.
Nehru’s niece, Nayantara Pandit, had been having tea with Indira Gandhi when they
heard the news. They too rushed to Birla House. Shortly after they arrived, someone
whispered, ‘Jawaharlal,’ and Indira’s father walked in. He had heard that Mohandas had
been shot, but did not realize until he saw the body that his guru was dead. He knelt by
Gandhi’s side, tears running down his face as he clutched the Mahatma’s lifeless hand. ‘I
had never seen him so grief-stricken before’, Nayantara wrote to her mother, Nan
Pandit, ‘like a lost child.’37 She was moved to note that her uncle, to whom it fell to lead
the world’s mourning, had to sublimate his personal grief to the needs of his nation.
‘When Mamu [Uncle] rose to his feet he had regained complete self-control,’ she noted.
‘Those who could bear to look at his face during those days saw a strained white mask
through which only the eyes revealed stark anguish.’38 Nayantara’s aunt, Betty,
remembered going into the quiet room and noticing Jawahar standing in the corner.
‘His face was drawn and tortured as it had not been even when our father died’, she

wrote. ‘I was quite controlled, or stunned, until then, but the agony which showed so
clearly on Bhai’s face made me break down.’39
Devadas Gandhi arrived to press his father’s still-warm arm, and stayed with the body
through the night. Dickie Mountbatten was there as soon as possible, but without
Edwina, who had stayed in Madras and was trying desperately to organize her ight
back. A tin can had been placed on the lawn to mark the spot where the Mahatma had
been killed. People were clustered around it, scraping up bits of the bloodstained soil to
carry o in their handkerchiefs for posterity. 40 Inside Gandhi’s chamber, the silence was
broken only by the smashing of glass. The crowds massing outside pressed forwards so
powerfully that they broke the windows of Birla House.41
Nehru went outside and climbed up the gates to address the people. Three times
during his speech he broke down in tears. When he climbed down, he was visibly
shaking.42 His words were not recorded but, soon afterwards, he went on All-India
Radio to give another such speech to the nation. ‘The light has gone out from our lives
and there is darkness everywhere,’ he began, his voice quavering. ‘And I do not know
what to tell you and how to say it.’ But he did know how to say it: and he said it
beautifully. ‘The light has gone out, I said, and yet I was wrong. For the light that shone
in this country was no ordinary light. The light that has illumined this country for these
many, many years will illumine this country for many more years, and a thousand years
later that light will still be seen in this country, and the world will see it, and it will give
solace to innumerable hearts. For that light represented something more than the
immediate present; it represented the living, eternal truths reminding us of the right
path, drawing us from error, taking this ancient country to freedom.’43
The next morning, Gandhi’s body was washed in a Hindu rite, garlanded with khadi
and scattered with rose petals. In an inappropriately militaristic gesture, it was placed
on an army weapons-carrier, drawn by 200 men of the services in a procession of 5100
troops, surrounded by armoured cars. The cortège took almost ve hours to pass through
the streets of New Delhi, packed with hundreds of thousands of people clad in the pure
white of mourning, up towards Old Delhi and Raj Ghat, on the west bank of the Jumna
River. Betty Hutheesing, Indira Gandhi and Padmaja Naidu walked behind the carriage.
Though it was January, halfway through the nine-mile walk they were sodden with
sweat, and Indira had begun to sway. Some soldiers in a jeep took pity on them and
drove them the rest of the way.44 Overhead, three aeroplanes showered petals on to the
procession. One million people were estimated to be waiting at the ghat by late
afternoon, including Dickie Mountbatten, in full uniform. Edwina, exhausted and griefstricken after a sleepless night organizing a plane to take her back to Delhi, was sitting
next to Jawaharlal Nehru on the dry earth. Unrecognized in the crowd was Gandhi’s
eldest son, Harilal, who had never reconciled with his father and was now su ering
from tuberculosis. Harilal was drunk. A few months later he, too, would be dead.
Gandhi’s body was laid on a pyre of sandalwood, and Nehru, in a unique departure
from his own strict codes against any form of religious observance, went forward to kiss
his guru’s feet. The pyre was lit by another of Gandhi’s sons, Ramdas, to a cry from the
crowds and a rush forward. The danger of the ames was immediately obvious. Nehru,

who had been staring into space in quiet desolation, jumped up and shoved his way
through to the front of the crowd, shouting at people to sit down, and pushing them
down if they did not comply. Dickie and Edwina Mountbatten sat immediately, forcing
the ranks behind them to follow suit. The crowd dropped to the ground, and a further
tragedy was averted.45 (The fact that the Mountbattens had deigned to sit on dry earth
amid a crowd of Indians raised a few eyebrows in London. A report from the Daily
Telegraph with a picture of the Mountbattens sitting cross-legged beside Patel and Baldev
Singh was torn out by Winston Churchill. He underlined the description of the Governor
General and his wife ‘squatting on the ground’.)46 Prayers were chanted, hymns sung,
and the entirety of Gandhi’s beloved Bhagavad Gita read aloud as the sun slowly set.
The flames burned until morning.
‘Gandhi has been assassinated’, wrote Noël Coward in his diary that day. ‘In my
humble opinion, a bloody good thing but far too late.’47 This churlish remark indicated
just how far the Mountbattens had come from their London set. Millions felt Gandhi’s
loss, but few so personally as Edwina Mountbatten. Yet it did not trigger a
reconciliation with her husband. Instead, Edwina sat down and poured her heart out in
a letter to Jawahar.48 She had been getting closer to him for several months. Now she
turned to him for comfort, and he to her.49 There was little that any of the
Mountbattens’ friends could do to repair Dickie’s and Edwina’s marriage, though some
of them were involved in it rather too closely. The new year had been followed by
another series of scorching rows, prompting Peter Murphy – still living with the
Mountbattens in Delhi – to write Edwina a letter begging her to give her husband
another chance. ‘It distresses me so that you ever imagine that you are not a very great
deep love in his life,’ he said. ‘What it seems you don’t know is the unfailing a ection
and loyalty that he feels for you and that he has spoken of so freely to me.’50 It may
have been true, but it did nothing to help. At one point Dickie, Edwina and Yola had
such a bitter and ugly ‘three-cornered row’ that Yola almost left India.51 Mountbatten
later con ded to his Private Secretary, John Barratt, that Edwina had been ‘di cult’ in
India, and put it down to the menopause that she was undergoing at the time. ‘He made
several oblique references to her relationship with Nehru,’ remembered Barratt.52
Meanwhile, that relationship became closer. In public, Jawahar and Edwina were
formal; in private, they were inseparable.53 Letters became fervent. ‘What did you tell
me and what did I say to you … ?’ mused Jawahar to Edwina in a letter written after
one of their many late-night meetings. ‘The more one talks, the more there is to say and
there is so much that it is di cult to put into words.’ 54 Edwina’s support was warm, but
never controlling. ‘In those days of tension, and later when she came to stay with my
brother after he became Prime Minister of the Republic of India, she was one of the few
people left who could break his sombre moods,’ remembered Jawahar’s sister, Betty.
‘When she was there, Bhai’s laughter would ring through the house as it used to when we
were young.’55 Dickie showed no sign of feeling excluded by the relationship. He pasted
into his own private photograph album a selection of pictures from early February,
when he and Edwina went to the Kumbh Mela at Allahabad with Jawahar. They rode in
an ornate howdah atop a giant elephant to the con uence of the Ganges and the

Jumna. Thousands lined the riverbanks and waved ags. One snapshot of Dickie,
Edwina, Jawahar and Pamela was captioned simply, in Dickie’s handwriting, ‘Family
visit to Allahabad’.56
From the sorrow and tragedy of Gandhi’s death, some hope emerged. Mountbatten
took the opportunity to tell Patel and Nehru that Gandhi’s last great wish had been to
see the two of them brought together. Weeping, the two men embraced.57 Furthermore,
though the long-anticipated nal sacri ce had not been made by his own hand, it had,
nonetheless, achieved a little of what he had spent much of his life pleading for. After a
small spate of attacks on Hindu Mahasabha members in Bombay, India calmed, and the
harassment of the Muslim population of Delhi ceased.58 Refugees were rehoused in the
Punjab. Stalls and shops reopened in Connaught Place. Unwittingly, with his act of
hatred, Nathuram Godse had brought Hindus and Muslims together. ‘What is all the
snivelling about?’ Sarojini Naidu asked Gandhi’s mourners de antly. ‘Would you rather
he had died of decrepit old age or indigestion? This was the only death great enough for
him.’59
On 2 February, the Indian government outlawed all communal organizations and
private armies, speci cally the Hindu Mahasabha, the RSS, the Sikh Akali Dal, and the
Muslim League National Guard. The threat of further assassinations remained, and all
eyes turned to the safety of Nehru. Nehru’s friend Krishna Menon, now High
Commissioner to London, sent Mountbatten a letter asking him to intervene personally
to protect the Prime Minister. ‘I am worried about Jawaharlal’, he wrote. ‘Is it not
possible for something drastic to be done to prevent him taking unnecessary risks. He
won’t listen to anyone else.’60 Mountbatten went further than Menon intended. He and
Edwina attempted to persuade Nehru to move in with them. ‘We o ered him a selfcontained at with a separate entrance and said we would take in thirty other
Government servants in one of the wings so that the accommodation vacated by them
could be given to refugees,’ Mountbatten wrote, ‘but I was unable to persuade Panditji
to move into the safety of Government House.’61 Nehru was, however, persuaded to
have his own house surrounded by armed guards. His niece, Rita Pandit, was staying
with him at the time and wrote to her mother of his irritation: ‘He hates all these
regulations but abides by them – yesterday he said he felt freer in jail than he does now,
& I can see why.’62 He endured it all with composure. ‘Jawaharlal is as magni cent as
ever, and bearing up in spite of his overwhelming sorrow and responsibility; and so is
Amrit’, wrote Edwina Mountbatten to Agatha Harrison. ‘I love them both.’63
In Pakistan, things were not going well for Jinnah. The prospect of open war with India
continued to loom on West Pakistan’s southern border. Now, on its northern border, the
government of Afghanistan was furious with him, believing he had armed the tribesmen
on their frontier.64 In the face of a resurgent Islamic nationalism inside his own state, he
continued to insist that ‘Pakistan is not going to be a theocratic State to be ruled by

priests with a divine mission. We have many non-Muslims – Hindus, Christians and
Parsees – but they are all Pakistanis. They will enjoy the same rights and privileges as
any other citizens and will play their rightful part in the a airs of Pakistan.’ 65 Jinnah’s
strategy to achieve Pakistan by exploiting the extremes of identity politics had been
extraordinarily successful. Unfortunately, his plan to run Pakistan as a progressive
liberal democracy with a moderate Islamic avour had been markedly less well worked
out. Moreover, many of Jinnah’s religious supporters had had a very di erent idea of
what Pakistan might be. The maulvis, maulanas and pirs, whom he had spent two
decades stirring up, would not return meekly to their boxes.
For all his strength and bluster, in private Jinnah was falling apart. He had su ered
from tuberculosis for a decade, and his deterioration was obvious to the very few who
were allowed to meet him. Margaret Bourke-White was one of them, sent to take a new
portrait for the cover of Life. When she arrived at his house, she was fobbed o with a
discreet code: ‘The Quaid-e-Azam has a bad cold.’
Bourke-White knew Fatima Jinnah fairly well, and was able to sweet-talk her way
into another appointment – on the condition that she would not take any close-up
pictures. ‘And when I saw his face, I knew why,’ she remembered. ‘The change was
terrifying. There seemed to be a spiritual numbness concealing something close to panic
underneath. As I went ahead with my pictures, his sister slipped up before each
photograph and tried gently to uncurl his desperately clenched hands.’66
Jinnah’s old loathing of Nehru had spilled over into an even greater loathing of
Mountbatten.67 He was convinced that India’s Governor General was working to turn
the Commonwealth against him, and he was not wrong. On 8 February, Mountbatten
wrote Attlee an extraordinary letter – which, constitutionally, he was not supposed to
write at all, for communication with Attlee was supposed to go through Nehru. In it, he
implied that British policy was now anti-India and pro-Pakistan, criticized the attitude
of the British at the UN, and admitted that ‘I am being attacked on all sides for having
given advice which is proving to be so disastrous’ in involving the UN at all. The Indian
government, he said, believed that Britain and the United States were backing Pakistan
as part of their goal of maintaining Muslim solidarity in the Middle East. ‘It appears to
me that Russia may well win India to her side by sponsoring her case,’ he warned. ‘I
must point out that if this does come to pass the only result will be that India is thrown
into the arms of Russia; and Russia will appear throughout this country as the saviour of
India against the machination of the United States and the United Kingdom.’68
The letter was an open threat, and Attlee took it as such, sending back a stinging
rebuke two days later. He pointed out that a Security Council resolution exactly in line
with India’s request would have led to war. ‘Is it impossible for you to get these sorts of
ideas into the heads of the Indian Government?’ he asked. ‘I realise of course that the
di culties are aggravated by Nehru’s own emotional attitude to Kashmir.’ He added
that the threat of Russian influence ‘does not make our flesh creep at all’.69
The rebuke prompted a lengthy response, in which Mountbatten complained about
‘British support for American power politics’. He added, in hurt tones, that he did not

believe that Nehru’s government would survive if ‘it were tamely to accept an award by
the Security Council in favour of Pakistan; and it is for this reason that I drew your
attention in my previous telegram to the grave consequences that such an award might
entail.’70 Someone at the British end highlighted this paragraph.
‘Mountbatten nds his present constitutional position of friendly adviser irksome at
times,’ noted Campbell-Johnson. ‘He can no longer step in between London and Delhi,
and his only link now is with the King, who strictly separates his various
sovereignties.’71
In the last week of February, alarming rumours began to reach Mountbatten’s ears.
The Pakistani government was preparing a genocide case, naming him as responsible
for the Punjab massacres. Mountbatten red o another urgent telegram to Attlee.
Attlee’s enquiries revealed the worrying fact that there was indeed reason to believe
Pakistan’s suggestion that Sir Cyril Radcli e had altered the boundary award at the last
moment, though it was not known whether this was done at the behest of Mountbatten.
If the matter was to be pursued further, they would have to talk to Radcli e – but this
‘does not seem very desirable’, noted the Commonwealth Relations Secretary, Philip
Noel-Baker. Noel-Baker sent a strictly personal message to the Pakistani government,
carefully worded so as to avoid denying anything that might well be true: ‘it would be
most unwise and highly improper to introduce these allegations’, the draft read; ‘unwise,
because we should certainly contest them; and improper because they would a ect the
honour and reputation of the King’s Representative in India, who has no means of
defending himself in public.’ The blu worked. Pakistan agreed that it would make no
reference to a dubious change in the boundary award.72 Britain was saved from a deeply
embarrassing investigation, and Mountbatten from potential ruin.
With the drama in Kashmir, the problem of Hyderabad had almost been forgotten.
Mountbatten had nally managed to conclude a standstill agreement with the state at
the very end of November, though the Hyderabad delegation had objected to every
possible detail, kicking up fusses over substituting the word ‘shall’ for the word ‘will’ in
one clause, and over the use of a comma as opposed to their preferred semi-colon in
another.73 A few days later, a Hindu protester threw a hand-grenade at the Nizam’s car.
The Nizam was fortunate to escape without injury.
By the spring, the Governor General and the Nizam had lost patience with each other.
Mountbatten wrote to the Nizam’s former advocate, Walter Monckton, that the Nizam
had ‘been behaving queerly since your departure’. Almost simultaneously, the Nizam
wrote to Monckton to the e ect that Mountbatten wanted to force him to join India, but
that ‘he had better not interfere with this matter since political situation may aggravate
if he does so’.74 Consequently, Mountbatten washed his hands of Hyderabad. Patel took
over and, by March, the Indian government had begun to use its geographical
encirclement of Hyderabad to start an economic blockade.75 Monckton got into a heated
argument over these sanctions with Patel at the beginning of March, and for a moment
it looked as if another war might break out. But, during lunch the next day, Patel

su ered a massive heart attack, which would incapacitate him for several months. Once
again, and with much reluctance, Mountbatten had to step in.
Mountbatten sent a last warning letter to the Nizam at the end of April, but refused to
go to Hyderabad himself. Instead, he sent his press attaché. Campbell-Johnson ew to
Hyderabad on 15 May, and was taken to meet the Nizam. The eccentric Nizam was
renowned for being the world’s worst-dressed billionaire, and that day was clad in a
threadbare dressing-gown. They spoke in a dark, cluttered Victorian reception room,
under the arresting gaze of a portrait of King George V. The Nizam expounded his view
of Islam, complained about Palestine, and declared troublingly that ‘Constitutional
monarchy may be all very well in Europe and the west; it has no meaning in the East.’76
The Mountbattens, meanwhile, travelled the length and breadth of India, trying to t
into a few months the trips to every state that had taken most viceroys the fullness of
their ve-year terms. They inspected guards and hospitals in Cawnpore, visited the
Buddhist temple at Sarnath, went by motor-boat to have tea at Ramnagar Fort, explored
the caves at Bhubaneshwar, presented colours to the infantry in Trivandrum, cruised the
backwaters in Travancore, ascended the hills at Ooty, laid foundation stones in Bundi,
and opened engineering colleges in Anand. Edwina often toured without her husband,
visiting Untouchable centres and leper clinics.
The furthest of these trips took the Mountbattens to Rangoon in newly independent
Burma. There was a grand party at the President’s house, at which the Mountbattens
were presented to a wide array of Burmese notables including Aung San Suu Kyi, the
one-year-old daughter of their late friend, Aung San.77 The following day, Mountbatten
returned the magni cent thirty-feet-high Hlutdaw Throne to the nation. The mood was
happy, but tensions between Aung San’s Anti-Fascist People’s Freedom League and
communist factions ran close to the surface. ‘There are the symptoms here of complete
political disintegration,’ noted Alan Campbell-Johnson ominously.78 All over the world,
hostility was building. A communist coup in Czechoslovakia at the end of February had
sparked fears in Washington that Finland, Italy, Austria and France might be next to fall
into the Russian embrace. By the beginning of March, there was at least some
reassurance from India. Nehru informed the US State Department that it would be
‘unthinkable’ for India to side with Russia in another world war.79 West Bengal
outlawed the Communist Party and arrested 400 activists at the end of March,
provoking an estrangement between Nehru and his American communist friend Paul
Robeson, as well as a strike of 15,000 Bombay mill workers.
But the sticking point was still Kashmir. Some feared that Mountbatten’s close
friendship with Nehru might be holding him back from telling the Prime Minister just
how hopeless the situation was. ‘Panditji is capable of hearing profoundly unpleasant
things,’ the Governor of West Bengal, Chakravarty Rajagopalachari, hinted to
Mountbatten during a tea-party in Calcutta.80 He would hear them soon enough,
whether or not Mountbatten was prepared to tell him. Soon afterwards Sir Hari Singh,
now e ectively an ex-Maharaja and a wretched gure, arrived at Government House to
stay with the Mountbattens.81 While he was there, news came through of the nal UN
Security Council resolution on Kashmir, requiring India to withdraw as well as Pakistan.

It was a huge disappointment for Nehru, more so because it had the backing of the
British government.82 Pakistan was disappointed, too, because under the new resolution
it was required to call o the tribesmen before India withdrew. ‘Oh dear’, wrote Horace
Alexander to Edwina, ‘I sometimes think our greatest crime against India was to turn all
her best sons into lawyers.’83 Even Edwina had to admit that ‘Panditji, with all his
understanding, statesmanship and fair-mindedness, is not always so easy to discuss
Kashmir with’.84 Jawahar arranged to visit Kashmir in May to celebrate a victory over
the Pakistani tribesmen. He wanted to take Edwina, but not Dickie, with him. This plan
was hastily dropped in the rst week of May, with good reason. The appearance of the
Governor General’s wife in war-torn Kashmir on the arm of the Indian Prime Minister
would have been distasteful both to the Pakistani and to the British governments.85
Jawahar went alone for the celebrations, and Edwina visited Kashmir with Amrit Kaur
two weeks later.86 Edwina was shocked by the poor provision for welfare in Srinagar,
but was impressed to see women running reconstruction and relief e orts. ‘It is always
true that good comes out of evil’, she wrote to Sheikh Abdullah afterwards, ‘and there is
no doubt that this crisis has brought out women to play their full part in their country’s
a airs in a way which would otherwise have taken years of evolution to achieve.’
Immediately on the evening of her return to Delhi, she went to see Nehru and convinced
him to send more government help through her United Council for Relief and Welfare.87
Mountbatten’s term as Governor General was unde ned, though he had signed up as
Viceroy on the basis of an end-date of June 1948. He preferred April, though Patel,
according to Campbell-Johnson, had tried to persuade him to stay on for ve years;
Nehru, too, had asked him for another year. The date remained June 1948. Finding a
successor would prove troublesome, for the role was e ectively a retirement from party
politics. Edwina suggested Patel; and, for obvious reasons, Nehru was ‘immensely taken’
with the idea of his greatest adversary in Congress being put out to pasture. But, when
Mountbatten o ered him the job, Patel simply ‘roared with laughter’. 88 Nehru’s second
choice was Rajagopalachari, but the Governor of West Bengal was a wise man, and did
not want the job at all. Nehru had rst o ered it to him on 30 March, and he asked for a
few days to think it over. A begging letter from Nehru arrived a week later. ‘I do hope
you will not disappoint us’, he wrote. ‘We want you here to help us in many ways. The
burden on some of us is more than we can carry.’ With the greatest disinclination,
Rajagopalachari accepted, and was named Mountbatten’s successor on 3 May.89
Three days after the announcement, Nehru wrote Rajagopalachari a sad letter. ‘Our
politics have lost all real character or moral basis and we function as pure opportunists,’
he confessed, alluding to events since the death of Gandhi. ‘I have little doubt that we
are rapidly deteriorating and becoming reactionary in our outlook and activities.’ He
concluded: ‘I feel that it will be good for me as well as for India if I was out of the
picture for a while.’90
Rajagopalachari sent back a telegram immediately, admitting he had been deeply
moved by Nehru’s words. ‘I feel you should be Governor-General instead of me and let

Sardar [Patel] be Prime Minister’, he wrote. ‘Much preferable to my appointment. You
are big enough to understand the spirit in which I suggest this.’91 But Nehru was not
ready to retire into a ceremonial role, and even less so to hand over the prime
ministership to Patel. Depressed though he was at the destruction of his vision for a free
India, he was still driven to mend it. Edwina could sense his tension and his exhaustion.
She persuaded him to take a few days up in the hills with her, as they had the year
before: ‘getting you to Mashobra to talk naturally and informally had become an
obsession’, she wrote to Jawahar afterwards.92
The next day, Jawahar drove with Dickie, Edwina and their daughter, Pamela, up to
the retreat at Mashobra in a red open-topped car. The drive into the mountains from
Delhi took many hours, suddenly switching into a vertiginous ascent when the at
expanse of the Punjab rucks up into the green hills at the base of the Himalayas. Hot,
dusty roads give way to cool hillside tracks, and then to thickly wooded slopes, lightly
veiled in the mist that lingers before the monsoon rains. As usual, Jawahar’s mood
lightened in direct proportion to the altitude.
Dickie liked Jawahar; and, though it was a very high risk in political terms, his wife’s
a air presented a relatively low risk in personal terms. As he must have known, Edwina
could not leave him for the Prime Minister of India. Better to allow Edwina to carry on
with Jawahar, than to risk her going o with someone else in circumstances he might
not be able to control. ‘Please keep this to yourselves but she and Jawarhalal [sic] are so
sweet together’, he wrote to his elder daughter, Patricia. ‘They really dote on each other
in the nicest way and Pammy and I are doing everything we can to be tactful and help.
Mummy has been incredibly sweet lately and we’ve been such a happy family.’93 And so
Edwina and Jawahar walked together among the wild strawberry bushes during the
days, and drove with Pamela along winding roads to the brightly lit town of Simla in
the evenings. Dickie stayed behind at the house to devote himself with his trademark
zealous jollity to his family tree. He had devised a system, based on that used in cattlebreeding, for working out exactly how any two people on it were related by comparing
their alphanumeric codes.94 It is hard to imagine what he can have been doing with it,
several thousand miles away from the Battenberg archives, in a lodge surrounded by
pine forests outside a rickety old Himalayan town. Perhaps his obsession was about
reinforcing a sense of stability and family continuity, but it also gave his wife the space
and privacy she had always wanted.
She made the most of it. Edwina and Jawahar met early every morning in the garden.
They drove together along the Tibet Road, stopping for picnics in the woods. They
stayed up late and alone after Dickie and Pamela had retired to bed. When Jawahar
came to see Edwina in her room, he somehow upset an inkstand. ‘They were both too
busy mopping it up to be abashed’, wrote Edwina’s o cial biographer, leaving the
mystery of why they should have been abashed to the imagination of the reader.95 ‘Mr
Nehru was obviously a very lonely man,’ remembered Patricia Mountbatten years later,
‘and my mother was somebody who had not been able to communicate or make easy
relationships with anybody, even with her own husband. I think the fact that these two
had this similar lack in their lives, which the other person ful lled, gave them a very

strong relationship to each other.’96 The Mountbattens’ other daughter, Pamela, agreed:
‘I’ve often been asked whether I think Nehru and my mother were in love. The answer
undoubtedly is yes, they were.’97
Dickie was not entirely the noble martyr. He attended plays at Simla’s Gaiety Theatre,
and fell for an ‘exceptionally lovely Anglo-Indian girl’ in one of the leading roles. He
irted with her at dinner; afterwards she asked for his autograph, and held his hand for
just a little too long. ‘Isn’t it maddening I just can’t do anything about it’, Dickie wrote
to Patricia. ‘She was just my cup of tea. Pammy was amused but luckily I don’t think
Mummy noticed anything.’98 Edwina’s attention was indeed elsewhere. Even a decade
later, Jawahar would reminisce to her about his sudden realization at Mashobra ‘that
there was a deeper attachment between us, that some uncontrollable force, of which I
was only dimly aware, drew us to each other’.99 Their relationship had worked because
it allowed both Jawahar and Edwina their own private space; but suddenly being
together around the clock did not seem so undesirable after all. The intensity of their
feelings both exhilarated and frightened them. They made a pact that their work would
always have to come first.
‘I had four very quiet and restful days in Mashobra’, Jawahar wrote to Indira. ‘I did
no work at all, although I took many papers. I was not in the mood to work.’100 On the
day he left, Edwina saw him o at half-past six in the morning. ‘I hated seeing you drive
away this morning’, she wrote afterwards; ‘you have left me with a strange sense of
peace and happiness. Perhaps I have brought you the same?’101 Dickie showed lms at
the Governor General’s Lodge – This Time for Keeps, and The Un nished Dance. Edwina,
distracted and petulant with Dickie, awaited her reply from Jawahar. It had been sent
as soon as he returned to Delhi. ‘Life is a dreary business’, he wrote, ‘and when a bright
patch comes it rather takes one’s breath away’.102 The Mountbattens returned to Delhi
on 25 May, and were taken that evening to see the Indian National Theatre’s production
of A Bill of Divorcement.
As the mercury in the thermometers climbed again, the capital became hot and dusty.
‘But I love Delhi even like this and India and Indians’, wrote Edwina, ‘and my heart
aches at the thought of leaving them so soon.’103 In the swift jumble of events that
characterized their last weeks in India, a few nal dramatic scenes were played out.
Negotiations with Hyderabad broke o for good on 17 June, ending with a telephone
message from Monckton to Mountbatten with a single word: ‘Lost’.104 India indicated
that it might intensify its blockade of the state, but there was no time to x it. Four days
later, the Mountbattens were to leave.
Unable to leave behind him a settlement with Hyderabad or peace in Kashmir,
Mountbatten bequeathed to Nehru, Patel, V.P. Menon and Rajagopalachari a
memorandum on the future of India. Admitting upfront that ‘it would be gross conceit if
I were to try and continue to in uence the Government of India after my departure’, he
then launched into nineteen pages of gross conceit. He covered everything: the progress
of nationalization, being nice to the Civil Service, the establishment of an honours

system, compulsory holidays for the Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister, aircraft
factories in Bangalore, training procedures for the Royal Indian Navy, the installation of
air conditioning in all government o ces. He was particularly concerned that India
should become an oil-rich state. ‘Clearly the first requirement is to find the oil,’ he noted.
‘To me it seems quite incredible that there should be oil to the north and west of India
and oil to the east of India, but no oil has been found in India apart from Assam.’
Geological surveys had previously drawn the conclusion that, incredible though it may
have seemed, there really was none. No matter. Mountbatten recommended that they be
redone. He further suggested that ambassadors and governors be chosen on the basis of
their wives. ‘If there are two candidates available, one for a Governorship and one for
an Ambassador’s post,’ he explained, ‘and one has a wife really competent to help with
the welfare services of her husband’s province, then I suggest that the one with the wife
should always be sent to the Governorship, and the one without to the Ambassadorial
post. But of course where possible men appointed to posts of this standing should have
wives, and, as I have said above, their qualities are very nearly as important as their
husbands!’105
Very nearly; perhaps even more so, in some respects, to judge from the great volume
of letters pouring into Government House praising Edwina for her work with the victims
of partition. Among them was one from Jawahar, asking whether she might stay to
continue that work. It was an astonishing suggestion. Edwina could not have left her
husband to live in India and carry on a close relationship with the Prime Minister
without triggering the greatest scandal since the abdication of her friend Edward VIII. It
might have been greater still. No one would have started a war over the King marrying
Wallis Simpson, but Edwina’s relationship with Jawahar had potentially devastating
political implications. Mountbatten’s viceroyalty was widely thought to have favoured
India over Pakistan, to the extent of meddling with international boundaries; the
suggestion that he had dabbled in Kashmir had added fuel to the re. If it emerged now
that his wife was romantically involved with Jawaharlal Nehru, with whom she had
been extensively photographed since March 1947, it would have opened every decision
Mountbatten had made to scrutiny. Few would have believed the line later perfected by
o cial biographers that Jawahar’s and Edwina’s a air had not begun until May 1948.
There was far too much evidence of an intimate long-term friendship. The scandal
would have provided a rm base for any allegations of pro-Nehru bias that anyone
wanted to sling around, and as such could have prompted a cascade of disasters: at the
very least an investigation into the Radcli e award and the naming of Mountbatten in
the genocide case that the Pakistani government had been advised to tone down; quite
feasibly more civil unrest; perhaps even another full-scale war between Pakistan and
India. The security of three nations – Britain, India and Pakistan – rested on this one
love a air being kept quiet. On a personal level, too, Jawahar could not have remained
in o ce in the face of such a story; though, in view of his frequent admissions of
dissatisfaction and an inclination to leave o ce that year, perhaps it was this aspect of
the idea that appealed to him.
Edwina replied that they had both agreed that they had to face reality and remember

their pact to put duty before desire. It was not possible for them to be together. ‘How
wise and right you are’, Jawahar wrote back, ‘but wisdom brings little satisfaction. A
feeling of acute malaise is creeping over me, and horror seizes me when I look at a
picture in my mind of your shaking thousands of hands on the night of the 20th and
saying your nal goodbye.’ But, he concluded: ‘Dickie and you cannot bypass your fate,
just as I cannot bypass mine.’106
Inevitably, the Mountbattens’ last days became a parade of social events: presenting
medals to sta , inspecting troops, holding luncheon parties, broadcasting to the nation.
A photographer from the Illustrated Weekly of India turned up at Government House to
take a series of pictures of the Mountbattens at home: the largest of which was one of
Edwina settled in a brocade-upholstered armchair, engrossed in a copy of Nehru’s
bestselling historical memoir, The Discovery of India.107 Edwina itemized the twenty-two
Indian charitable societies of which she was president, most of which dealt with
refugees, tra cked women and children, and the poor. She o ered the vice-presidency
of the United Council for Relief and Welfare, the organization she had started in
response to the partition crisis, to Jawahar. ‘If there were no other adequate reason for
associating myself with the Council,’ he replied, accepting it, ‘the fact that it might
enable me to work with you in a common task would be reason enough.’108
Jawahar held a farewell reception for the Mountbattens on 19 June. The following
afternoon, all three drove from the Delhi Gate to the Red Fort, through crowds estimated
at a quarter of a million which had assembled for a spontaneous street party. Their Rolls
Royces lled up with blossoms; spectators heaped garlands on to them as they
progressed along Chandni Chowk. Dickie saluted as he ascended a dais draped with a
Mughal-style velvet canopy. Edwina pressed her palms together, bowed her head, and
addressed the crowd in Hindi with the traditional greeting: ‘Namaste.’ So enthused were
the spectators that they rushed forward, breaking down the police barriers. According to
the Indian News Chronicle, ‘it was the dynamic personality of Pandit Nehru that restored
order’ – the ‘dynamic personality’ being a standard journalistic euphemism for Jawahar
landing a punch on a troublemaker.109
That night, the outgoing Governor General and his wife held their nal reception,
complete with jugglers, conjurors and a band. Dickie and Edwina themselves served
refreshments.110 A banquet was given at Government House, with Dickie sitting between
Amrit Kaur and Indira Gandhi, and Edwina opposite, next to Jawahar. Photographs
from the evening show Jawahar’s eyes downcast, his expression insuppressibly sad.
After dinner, he gave a speech in honour of Edwina. It was virtually an open
declaration of love.
The gods or some good fairy gave you beauty and high intelligence, and grace and charm and vitality – great gifts – and
she who possesses them is a great lady wherever she goes. But unto those who have, even more shall be given: and
they gave you something that was even rarer than those gifts – the human touch, the love of humanity, the urge to
serve those who su er and who are in distress. And this amazing mixture of qualities results in a radiant personality
and in the healer’s touch.
Wherever you have gone you have brought solace, and you have brought hope and encouragement. Is it surprising,

therefore, that the people of India should love you and look up to you as one of themselves and should grieve that you
are going? Hundreds of thousands have seen you personally in various camps and other places and in hospitals, and
hundreds of thousands will be sorrowful at the news that you have gone.111
At these words, Edwina burst into tears. Jawahar, too, was inconsolable, and was too
upset to listen to Edwina’s eventual speech of thanks. The time came for an exchange of
presents: Mountbatten gave the Indian government a set of gold plates, and it gave him
a silver tray, engraved all over with the signatures of cabinet ministers and provincial
governors. In the centre, it read: ‘with a ection and good wishes and as a token of
friendship, Jawaharlal Nehru.’ Nehru had tried to secure for Mountbatten something he
would have prized even more: he had written to the King just after their return from
Mashobra, suggesting Mountbatten be upgraded from an earldom even higher up the
ranks of the nobility. The King’s secretary replied that ‘adequate recognition’ of the
Mountbattens’ service had already been given.112
In private, they gave each other more personal gifts. Edwina gave Jawahar an
eighteenth-century gold box, an emerald ring and a silver St Christopher medallion that
her mother had given to her father. The last bemused him slightly: ‘Am I supposed to
wear it round my neck?’ he wrote, tongue in cheek. ‘Heaven forbid.’113 He gave her an
ancient coin, a box of mangoes and a copy of his autobiography. Dickie sent Jawahar
an engraved silver box with the latter’s name hopelessly mixed up on it. He would never
master the spelling, nor for that matter the pronunciation, of the name Jawaharlal,
usually rendering it Jawarhalal or Jahawarlal.114 Jawahar wrote to Edwina she must
not tell her husband of his mistake, noting that he rather liked it – the inscription
reminded him so much of Dickie.
Early in the morning of 21 June, the Mountbattens drove to Palam air eld in an open
carriage drawn by six horses through a parade of cheering Indians. Outside Government
House, one of the horses jibbed and refused to move. ‘Even the horses won’t let you go!’
shouted a voice from the crowd. The front pair had to be removed, and the carriage
went on to Palam with four.115 A large military assembly greeted the former viceregal
family. The band played Rabindranath Tagore’s anthem, ‘Jana Gana Mana’ (‘Thou art
the ruler of the minds of all people’), and ‘God Save the King’. Edwina accepted two
garlands of jasmine from the crowd. Dickie’s face was tight with emotion; reporters
noted that Jawahar, too, was ‘visibly moved’. Edwina hugged Rajagopalachari as
Jawahar shook hands with Dickie and kissed Pamela on the cheek. As Dickie moved on
to shake hands with his successor, Jawahar bowed his head to Edwina, and clasped, then
kissed, her hand. The hour had come. Whatever she was feeling inside, Edwina had to
get on the plane with her husband. At half past eight precisely, the York’s propellers
began to spin, and it took off for the last time from the tarmac at Delhi.116
The new Governor General, Chakravarty Rajagopalachari, was a sharply observant
man. ‘Lord Mountbatten has wound up Indo-British history in a manner which has
secured for Britain a re-conquest’, he wrote to Attlee, before concluding enigmatically:
‘It is only those who have seen with their eyes how our Prime Minister and the people of
India have bid adieu to the late Governor-General and his noble wife that can realise the

full meaning of what I have said.’117

PART IV
AFTERWARDS

CHAPTER 19: A KISS GOODBYE

ever hosted was gone. At its peak soon after the
THAT WAS IT, THEN: THE LARGEST EMPIRE THE WORLD HAD
First World War, the British Empire had claimed an area of well over 14 million square
miles – more than six times the size of the Roman Empire – and 500 million people. Of
those, 400 million had been Indian. The day after the Mountbattens left India, King
George VI issued a proclamation formally dropping the title ‘Emperor of India’. The new
Governor General, Chakravarty Rajagopalachari, wrote to Mountbatten, quoting a piece
from the Manchester Guardian that said he ‘ended the long British rule of India not with a
whimper but with an unmistakable bang’. Rajagopalachari added: ‘Now we here all
know that it was not a bang but with a kiss you left us.’1
Dickie and Edwina emerged from their plane back at Northolt looking exhausted,
lined and rumpled. Edwina arrived back in Britain not, she felt, to a much-needed rest,
but to a life of emptiness. ‘Idleness to Edwina was things not happening, and
uneventfulness to her was sheer hell,’ one of her friends remembered. ‘You could see the
pain on her face – adding to all those lines.’2
‘Life is lonely and empty and unreal’, Edwina wrote to Jawahar. Her husband
dragged her to garden parties at Buckingham Palace – ‘a waste of time’, she thought,
‘but Dickie insists.’3 The pain of her absence was felt in India, too. Jawahar wrote to
Edwina that he could still sense her ‘fragrance on the air’, and that he read and reread
her letters. ‘I lose myself in dreamland, which is very unbecoming in a PM,’ he
confessed. ‘But then I am only incidentally a PM.’4 To Dickie, too, he admitted a sense of
loss. ‘It is extraordinary how the Mountbattens seemed to ll Delhi and without them
there is a kind of vacuum’, he wrote. He had written ‘seem’, and added the ‘ed’ later.5
When Rajagopalachari had described the Mountbattens leaving India with a kiss
rather than a bang, he had been writing literally. All over the world, newspapers
printed a picture of him hugging Edwina as she left Delhi. He sent a cutting of it from
t he Madras Mail to Dickie. ‘The Madras folk must have frowned at this unorthodox
posture,’ he noted with some amusement.6 Some British folk frowned, too: ‘Throughout
the British world many an appetite for breakfast must have been ruined,’ opined the
weekly Truth, describing the hug as a sign of ‘a lack of respect towards European
women’.7 Dickie wrote in disgust about this ‘vile article’, noting angrily that ‘this is what
one has to expect from the worst reactionary paper in England’.8
Not everyone was delighted to have the Mountbattens back. On 25 June, Attlee
sounded out Churchill about whether he and his wife would be likely to accept
invitations to a dinner for the Mountbattens. Churchill returned a snub.9 At a garden
party of Anthony Eden’s, Mountbatten walked over to Churchill with arms outstretched.
Churchill scowled, and trans xed him with a sausagey nger. ‘Dickie, stand there!’ he

snapped. ‘What you did to us in India was like whipping your riding crop across my
face!’ According to Mountbatten, the Conservative leader would not speak to him again
for seven years, though from their letters Churchill’s reaction seems to have been less
operatic.10 At the party, Churchill had asked a thorny question about the speed of arms
transfers from India to Pakistan, but he accepted Mountbatten’s answer and wrote a
warm letter afterwards.11
Both Mountbattens were called upon to speak at the East India Association at the
Imperial Institute about their time in India. ‘Dickie … told the story straightforwardly
from his point of view, though naturally skating over Kashmir and Hyderabad,’
observed Leo Amery. ‘Then Edwina, looking very handsome and evidently speaking
most e ectively, though unfortunately I could catch very little of what she said.’ 12 She
began with a friendly crack at her husband: ‘I will confess he has always been my
number one pin-up boy.’ But she nished on a tribute to Nehru: ‘My husband has
referred to India’s magni cent Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, and I would like to
say what an inspiration he has been to all of us who have tried to help him in the past
di cult months. He has been an inspiration to the doctors and nurses, to the welfare
workers, and to the refugees themselves. I shall always remember the help and courage
and the wise counsel he gave to me and to my colleagues at all times.’13 The contrast
between the pin-up boy and the magni cent inspiration de ned her relationships with
the two men. With Dickie, she was in an a ectionate, sexless companionship; with
Jawahar, she had found something more profound and more passionate.
The importance of the relationship to both Mountbattens is obvious from the
correspondence between Jawahar and Dickie. On 3 July Jawahar, noting the
seriousness of the situations in Kashmir and Hyderabad, warned Dickie that his
proposed visit to Britain in September or October ‘might not come o ’. 14 Dickie
responded with several feverish pages of cajoling, trying every tack from, ‘You will nd
the experience of getting out of India and looking at your country from the outside
world an exhilarating experience’, to ‘You will require a measure of rest, or at all events
a change in your very busy routine’, to reminding him of his ‘valuable contacts in
London’, to joking that ‘Unless you can come away for a reasonable while, there must
be something wrong with your organisation!’15
On receipt of Nehru’s letter, Mountbatten had red o a suggestion to Attlee that they
might meet with Cripps, Noel-Baker and Krishna Menon to discuss the situation. In a
lapse of fair-mindedness, he omitted any Pakistani or even pro-Pakistan names from
this list.16 Afterwards, he reported happily to Nehru that the letter sent to Liaquat had
been ‘just about the strongest that has ever been sent’.17 He also noted that he was
‘doing what I can to keep Winston from making any statements about India, though this
is not an easy one.’18 But the problems were not so readily xed and, by 1 August,
Nehru admitted to Mountbatten that India was ‘in open, though formally undeclared,
war with Pakistan in Kashmir’.19 ‘How I wish I could still be with you in Delhi,’ replied
Mountbatten.20 At the end of a long letter to Jawahar, detailing all the things he had
done to resolve the situation, Dickie noted that: ‘We all expect you over in October, and
the sooner you can come in October, the more we can see of you, and no-one, neither

the King, the Prime Minister, nor your late Governor-General, and certainly not his
wife, would hear of your not coming, whatever the circumstances.’21
The circumstances changed quickly for, on 11 September 1948, Mohammad Ali Jinnah
nally succumbed to his illness. He had been on his way to Karachi. Fatima remembered
him speaking in delirium: ‘Kashmir … Give them … the right … to
decide … Constitution … I will complete it … soon … Refugees … give them … all
assistance … Pakistan.’22 According to his doctor, Jinnah saw Liaquat and told him that
Pakistan was ‘the biggest blunder of my life’. Further yet, he declared: ‘If now I get an
opportunity I will go to Delhi and tell Jawaharlal to forget about the follies of the past
and become friends again.’23 It is impossible to prove whether Jinnah actually said these
words or not; either way, he was to have no further opportunity for a rapprochement.
He was taken from the airport to the Governor General’s house in an ambulance, which
broke down after four miles on a main road in the middle of a refugee settlement with
tra c honking by. The heat sizzled, ies buzzing around the Quaid-e-Azam’s ashen face
as Fatima attempted to fan them away. It was an hour before another ambulance could
be found. Jinnah was taken back to Government House, where Fatima watched him
sleep for about two hours. ‘Oh, Jin,’ she remembered thinking, ‘if they could pump out
all my blood, and put it in you, so that you may live.’ He woke one nal time and
whispered to her ‘Fati, khuda ha z.… la ilaha il
Allah … Mohammad … rasul … Allah.’24 His head slumped to the right. He had died
with the confession of faith just past his lips.
Two days after Jinnah’s death, India swooped on Hyderabad, the only contentious
princely state other than Kashmir that still remained outside India or Pakistan. The
Nizam appealed to the UN, but soon dropped his resistance. ‘There is still the most widespread misunderstanding over here about the action taken in Hyderabad,’ Mountbatten
reported back to Rajagopalachari a week later, ‘since even quite intelligent people seem
to regard it as an act of military aggression and conquest.’25
‘So your wish is being ful lled,’ Rajagopalachari teased Mountbatten on 5 October, ‘and
Jawaharlalji is put into the plane & despatched to Broadlands!’26 Nehru was o cially
received at Heathrow, but his rst action after that was to go to the Mountbattens’ small
at: ‘it is a change from Govt House’, he wrote to Indira. 27 For Edwina, his midnight
visit was ‘too lovely’.28 The very next day, she drove him to Broadlands. Dickie tactfully
ensured that he would be absent for much of the time at Dartmouth and at a ‘very
boring’ Rotary Club dinner. ‘Edwina will be awaiting you’, he wrote to Jawahar.29 The
two of them, alone at last in the privacy of her estate, were able to talk, laugh and cry
together, to embrace, and to press each other’s hands on walks by the river.30 Even after
Dickie turned up, the weekend was a great success, so much so that Jawahar changed
his plans so that he might return the following weekend as well.31 The Mountbattens
had always been comfortable with ménages-à-trois, and Jawahar was tted in with their
family life without di culty – though he startled the servants by standing on his head
when they brought him his grapefruit and cereal. ‘Funny fellow,’ boomed Dickie. ‘That

explains why he sees the world upside down!’32 The days were lled with dinner parties,
games on the lawn, riding in the grounds, card games and gossip.33 ‘The Mountbatten
family derived a lot of amusement from a letter Dickie received from a gentleman in
Calcutta’, wrote Jawahar to Indira, ‘suggesting that in the interest of Indo-British
friendship, Pamela should marry me!’34
Even in London, Nehru spent much of his time in the company of Mountbatten, and
more yet in that of his wife. There was a reception for the Commonwealth Prime
Ministers in the underwriters’ room at Lloyd’s of London, at which the Mountbattens
were greeted with a huge round of applause by the assembled guests. Photographs of the
event in the Tatler showed a now familiar scene: Edwina pressed closely to Jawahar’s
side and laughing with him, while Dickie hovered in the background.35 He viewed this
theoretical rival for his wife’s heart with a sort of proud a ection. ‘He has literally
ta k en , not only everyone that matters in England, but all the Commonwealth
Representatives, by storm’, Dickie wrote to Rajagopalachari. ‘The King sat down and
wrote me one of his rare letters after he had left saying that he wished me to know what
a deep impression Jawaharlal had made on him and how much he liked him.’36
Mountbatten had taken great care to make sure this came about, writing a letter to the
King to introduce his ‘great friend Nehru’ and enclosing a full brie ng on how the
latter’s invasion of Hyderabad had liberated the grateful Nizam from the thrall of
fanatics. ‘Don’t forget that whereas Jinnah lost no chance of insulting the Crown –
Nehru has gone out of his way to be courteous about it,’ he ended, precisely inverting
the truth.37 The subject of all this e ort had mixed feelings. ‘I am told I made a hit, from
Buckingham Palace downwards’, Jawahar wrote to Indira. ‘I basked in all this praise
and adulation. But at the same time I felt rather uncomfortable and somewhat out of
place and counterfeit.’38
Despite his lifelong insistence that Indian freedom demanded a total rejection of all
ties to Britain, Jawahar was soon to agree to keep India in the Commonwealth. This
controversial decision was widely described as the ‘Great Betrayal’ within India, and as
‘The most extraordinary volte-face my brother made’ by Nehru’s own sister, Betty
Hutheesing. It was during talks with the Commonwealth Prime Ministers, she wrote,
that Nehru became convinced that India should remain within the Britannic orbit. True,
the Commonwealth provided links of trade and foreign policy; but ‘to this must be
added the pull of his strong friendship with the Mountbattens’, Betty noted.39 Once
again, it seemed the Mountbattens had saved India for Britain.
The Mountbattens had spun out the end of their personal empire. Their interventions
over Kashmir, Hyderabad and the Commonwealth were welcomed, and even solicited,
by the Indian government. But they were still only in their forties, and could hardly
spend the rest of their lives acting as India’s occasional agents in Britain. Shortly after
Nehru’s departure from London, they returned to Malta, and Dickie to the command of a
cruiser squadron. Having been the rst gentleman among 400 million in India, he was
now only thirteenth in precedence on a tiny island. Officers who had served under him a

few years before at South East Asia Command, and in India, now stood senior to him.
Moreover, there was no longer a war on; and peace deprived both Dickie and Edwina of
their primary function, which had been to make war and to clean up after it,
respectively.
Edwina had no more interest in pursuing a life of tedious naval wifedom than ever.
Instead, she threw herself back into the only work available. Over the next few years,
tours for her charities would take her around England and the Channel Islands, to
Germany, Austria and Trieste on the continent, and around Africa. But, most often of
all, they would take her to the east: to Hong Kong, Singapore, Malaya and Ceylon,
always by way of Delhi.40
Edwina and Jawahar wrote every day at rst. Inevitably, this tailed o to once a
week and nally once a fortnight, but the letters remained intimate until the end.
Jawahar sent Edwina presents from wherever he was in the world: sugar from the
United States (when it was rationed in Britain), cigarettes from Egypt, pressed ferns
from Sikkim, a book of photographs of erotic sculptures from the Temple of the Sun in
Orissa. ‘I must say they took my breath away for an instant’, he wrote. ‘There was no
sense of shame or of hiding anything.’ Edwina replied that she had found the sculptures
fascinating. ‘I am not interested in sex as sex’, she wrote. ‘There must be so much more
to it, beauty of spirit and form and in its conception. But I think you and I are in the
minority! Yet another treasured bond.’41
Whenever possible, they spent time with each other. Edwina went to India every year,
a fact that did not escape criticism. In 1953, Nehru was forced to defend Lady
Mountbatten in the Indian parliament when Communist Party members accused her of
trying to manoeuvre him into committing India to a defence pact with the Middle East.
A dramatic scene ensued, with Nehru shouting, ‘That’s a lie!’ and banging his st on the
table, while the Communists shouted, ‘No lie!’ back at him. The incident was struck from
the official record, but made it into British newspapers.42
‘It seems to me that the time has come when it should be pointed out to Edwina by
one of Her Majesty’s Ministers that these visits of hers to the Indian capital do not
further the general interests of the Commonwealth’, wrote the Queen’s Private Secretary
to Churchill’s Private Secretary.43 If a minister ever did get up the courage to point this
out to Edwina, it did not stop her. Once, at a reception for Commonwealth leaders in
London, Jawahar upset the other delegates by spending all evening deep in
conversation with Edwina and then conspicuously leaving with her.44 On another
occasion, when Jawahar and Edwina were staying together at Nainital in the
Himalayan foothills, the Governor’s son was sent to summon the guests for dinner.
Unwittingly, he opened the door of the Prime Minister’s suite, and was confronted by
the sight of Jawahar and Edwina in an embrace. He tactfully retreated, and nothing was
ever said about the incident.45 These were the days of discretion in political life.
Though such stories were never made fully public, hints of them leaked out. An antiNehru party in Delhi began using the slogan, ‘Break open Rama’s heart, you will nd
Sita written on it; break open Nehru’s heart, you will nd Lady Mountbatten written on

it.’46 Neither ever bothered refuting the rumours. ‘I have come to the conclusion that it is
best to ignore them as any argument about them feeds them or at any rate draws
people’s attention to them’, Jawahar wrote to Dickie. Dickie himself had been fending
o remarkably widespread speculation that he was planning a coup to install himself as
King Louis of Britain, and somehow simultaneously lead a communist revolution.
‘Edwina has told me about the various rumours and stories about you,’ Jawahar added.
‘I was a little surprised as well as amused to learn of them.’ He advised him, too, to
make no comment and let them go away.47 Whenever he was in Britain for a conference
or diplomatic visit, he would stay with Edwina at Broadlands. During these sojourns,
Dickie would remove himself to their London address.
Several times in the 1950s Edwina threatened divorce. Each time, Dickie responded
with tolerant dignity which melted her heart and brought her back. ‘I’ve never
attempted to stop you or hold you and I never shall’, he wrote; ‘I’m not that sel sh.’48
The Mountbattens achieved a sort of harmony and mutual a ection. It was to her
husband Edwina entrusted her love letters from Jawahar in 1952. Following a
haemorrhage, she had to undergo dangerous surgery. She presented Dickie with a sealed
letter before the doctor gave her the anaesthetic, telling him where they were. ‘You will
realize that they are a mixture of typical Jawaha [sic] letters, full of interest and facts
and really historic documents’, she had written. ‘Some of them have no “personal”
remarks at all. Others are love letters in a sense, though you yourself will realize the
strange relationship – most of it spiritual – which exists between us. J. has obviously
meant a very great deal in my life in these last years and I think I in his. Our meetings
have been rare and always eeting but I think I understand him, and perhaps he me, as
well as any human beings can ever understand each other.’49
It was an odd sort of confession, and not an apology. Edwina pulled through the
operation, but Dickie opened the letter. ‘I’m glad you realize that I know and have
always understood the very special relationship between Jawaha and you – made the
easier by my fondness and admiration for him and by the remarkably lucky fact that
among my many defects God did not add jealousy in any shape or form’, he wrote to
her. ‘That is why I’ve always made your visits to each other easy and been faintly hurt
when at times … you didn’t take me into your con dence right away.’50 Dickie
remained, as he had always been, utterly besotted with Edwina. If he had to
compromise on, or even facilitate, her relationships with others in order to keep her,
that was better than losing her entirely.
In Delhi, Nehru moved into a grander house, Teen Murti Bhavan (Three Statues
House), the former villa of the British Commander-in-Chief. He felt lost in it, though
Indira and Padmaja Naidu stayed with him and helped make it his own.51 He went on
long and arduous tours of India, to the consternation of his family and friends.52 On a
tour of Maharashtra, Jawahar travelled over 200 miles every day; Padmaja went with
him, and rested while he made speeches and attended meetings. He had particularly
looked forward to seeing the old fort at Ahmednagar, in which he had been imprisoned
for almost three years. He arrived to nd his nostalgia thwarted. There was a plaque on
the wall of a room in which he had not stayed, commemorating his internment in it. He

pointed out this error, and was met with indignation. ‘I was told that they had done this
on the best authority!’ he wrote to Indira. ‘Indeed they were reluctant to accept my
evidence!’53 In the garden, he was confronted by a pomegranate tree with another
plaque claiming falsely that the tree had been planted by him.
Yet he persisted in his tours. Nehru was at his happiest whenever he was in the centre
of a crowd of ordinary people. The bigger the crowd, the happier he was; if it became
unruly and broke through police cordons, he enjoyed it all the more. If it threatened
danger, he would create a distraction by leaping into the ght. Nehru’s security men
were required less often to protect him from the crowd, than to protect it from him. His
bodyguard G.K. Handoo ‘had to wrestle with him on many occasions to stop him from
jumping into the crowd’, remembered his security chief. ‘Held fast by Handoo’s arms,
Pandit Nehru would glare at him, but soon he would break into a smile and enquire if
anyone had been injured.’54
Dickie’s and Jawahar’s correspondence continued, always following the same pattern.
Nehru occasionally brought up his frustration over Kashmir; Mountbatten tried to
persuade him to start training up younger politicians to replace the ageing veterans of
the freedom ght who still dominated Congress. The latter issue had bothered
Mountbatten since before independence. At the end of July 1947, he had told Nehru that
his candidates for the Indian cabinet were too old and he should include some new
blood, ‘otherwise I fear Congress really will be nished within a year.’55 Five years
later, he was still pushing the same line, warning Nehru that he ‘might slip on a bananapeel one day’ and no successor would have been primed.56
But what Dickie and Jawahar wrote about, more than anything else, was Edwina.
They sent each other proud news of her achievements, and updates on her activities,
overwork and health. ‘Edwina has been overworking as usual’, wrote Dickie to Jawahar,
‘and has had a cold but won’t give in. She needs a rest but will never take one as we
both know.’57 Jawahar noted: ‘The only way, apparently, for her to get some rest is to
come to India. So I hope she will do so this winter.’58
She came almost every winter, often for several weeks. Dickie once went with her, in
1956. Every other time, he left them to each other, writing to Jawahar that he was
‘delighted’ that Edwina was visiting him on her way to Singapore, and adding: ‘Don’t let
her go visiting, inspecting, speechifying, and doing her usual round of activities. She has
overworked a great deal and really needs a rest.’59 On one occasion, Edwina was due to
visit Jawahar in Delhi but collapsed shortly before in Malta, and almost had to call the
trip o on doctors’ orders. She concealed the extent of her illness, but Dickie gave her a
bland letter to take to Jawahar about politics, and inside hid a ve-page update on her
condition. Edwina had been desperate to go, for Jawahar had promised her a visit to the
Ajanta Caves, a series of 2000-year-old Buddhist retreats carved out of a mountainside
in the Deccan. The caves are lled with jewel-like frescoes, revealing ancient Buddhist
India to have been a place of extraordinary richness, imagination and sensuality. ‘How
beautiful are the painted Bodhisattvas and the women of Ajanta!’ Jawahar had written
after rst seeing them in the 1930s. ‘One looks at those lovely and graceful gures
almost with pain. They have a dreamlike quality, far removed from the vulgarity and

cheapness of the life we see.’60 Edwina only agreed to postpone her trip after Jawahar
had sent her a telegram promising not to go to the caves without her. They nally went
together in 1957, Edwina describing it as ‘an enormous thrill’.61
The two men in Edwina’s life were open with each other about their feelings. Dickie
always emphasized that he would rather that Edwina ‘should really get t again and
take things easy for as long as she likes’ rather than hurrying back to him. Jawahar
wrote forlornly to Dickie of ‘a certain emptiness’ that struck him whenever Edwina
left.62
Mountbatten had written very properly to the King in April 1949 that, now he had
returned to active service in the Navy, it would no longer be possible for him to advise
Nehru: ‘there is obviously no question of my taking part in any discussions’, he wrote. ‘I
am sure you will agree that this is right.’63 He was unable to stick to this rule. Both
Mountbattens often met with government and opposition politicians on Nehru’s behalf,
to ‘put the position of India’.64
Edwina’s politics caused increasing friction with the British government. She was
criticized in the media and in the Admiralty for allowing the communist Yugoslav
leader, Tito, to entertain her in 1952. The oft-married Tito had invited her to lunch at
his villa, and she had been charmed by his ‘ ne physique, good looks and vital
personality’.65 The Admiralty warned the Mountbattens that they were close to the line,
prompting Dickie to write an aggrieved letter to Churchill. ‘You know how strongly I
feel that no serving o cer should involve himself in politics in any way’, he wrote. 66
Yet the archives reveal that he continued actively to advise Nehru throughout the 1950s
and even into the 1960s, after he became Chief of Defence Sta for the British
government. On matters of foreign policy – Goa, Kashmir, China – the two wrote
often.67 As a serving o cer in the British Navy, it was injudicious of Mountbatten to
advise the Prime Minister of another dominion; to set about selling him arms, on the
other hand, was downright reckless. When Nehru stayed with the Mountbattens in 1955,
Dickie suggested that he might buy the Gnat, an aircraft manufactured by Follands, and
that he could transfer production of it to India. A factory was set up in Bangalore, with
parts supplied from England. Gnats would be used extensively in the 1965 war with
Pakistan.68
On 20 November 1949, Princess Elizabeth had own to Malta to join her husband at the
Mountbattens’ villa. It was the beginning of a decade of close association between the
Mountbattens and the Edinburghs, as the royal couple were then known. ‘I always feel
most bogus in this kind of circle’, Edwina wrote to Jawahar. Then again, Dickie
flourished in it.69
When King George VI died in 1952, Elizabeth became Queen. Quick o the mark as
ever, Dickie held a dinner party at Broadlands only days after his cousin’s death. He
called for champagne, to celebrate the fact that the ‘House of Mountbatten’ now
reigned. Prince Ernest Augustus of Hanover was among the guests; he reported the
anecdote to the late King’s mother, Queen Mary, and it precipitated an explosive

reaction. Winston Churchill had returned to o ce as Prime Minister the previous year.
His Private Secretary was summoned, and sent back to his master with explicit
instructions to reverse this coup d’état.70 The secretary remembered that Philip argued
not for the name Mountbatten, but for Edinburgh, after his dukedom.71 Neither option
appealed to Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother, the royal household, nor
the cabinet. The last of these august bodies came down hard in favour of a reversion to
the unadorned Windsor.
Faced with such trenchant opposition, the twenty- ve-year-old Queen Elizabeth II
issued a royal proclamation on 4 April declaring that she and her descendants would
indeed continue to bear the name of Windsor. Quotes attributed to Philip on receipt of
this news range from the petulant (‘I am the only man in the country not allowed to
give his name to his children’), to the anguished (‘I’m nothing but a bloody amoeba’), to
the bitterly angry (‘All they wanted was my sperm. I’m nothing but a fucking sperm
factory to them’).72 Each boils down to the same point. ‘What the devil does that
damned fool Edinburgh think that the family name has got to do with him,’ Queen Mary
remarked shortly afterwards, proving him right.73
Elizabeth’s coronation the following year brought Nehru back to London. He stayed at
Claridge’s, where Nehru’s aide, eager to ensure that the trip went smoothly, took the
liberty of sending the prime ministerial pyjamas to the hotel laundry service. When
Nehru found out, he rebuked the aide. ‘Do you know that the laundry service in this
hotel costs more than the price of the clothes?’ he scolded. He proceeded to wash his
own clothes in the hotel sink, and even to iron his achkan neatly afterwards.74 It was
one among many economies which, when compared to the spendthrift young Jawahar
of his Cambridge days, indicate that Gandhi’s in uence was not without its bene ts.
Nehru travelled on commercial ights rather than private jets, and took buses rather
than chau eur-driven cars. 75 He was intolerant of any fuss or ceremony. On 1 June, he
had been invited to a pre-coronation party at Buckingham Palace. A long list of protocol
instructions arrived, detailing when to arrive, what to wear, how to shake hands, how to
back away from the Queen after shaking hands, and so on. ‘I am not going to do any of
this,’ remarked Jawahar. ‘Let those who want to shake hands with the Queen do so. I
can’t do it.’76
He took Indira to the party but, as usual, ended up with Edwina. Things went o
badly. The pair of them got into a ght with Oliver Lyttelton, the Colonial Secretary,
over the Mau Mau rebellion in Kenya. Lyttelton commented on the rebellion’s ‘terrible
savagery’, to which Edwina rejoined: ‘On both sides.’ Jawahar added curtly that the
British would achieve nothing by shooting Africans. Lyttelton was outraged at both of
them. ‘I am thinking of sending Edwina the photographs of some of the atrocities so she
cannot repeat her disgraceful remarks’, he wrote to Churchill.77 Churchill promised to
take it up with the Queen, and shortly afterwards tried to block Edwina from
accompanying her husband on an o cial visit to Turkey. Dickie reassured him that
Edwina denied making the Mau Mau remarks, and that in any case she had already
accepted the Turkish invitation. Reluctantly, Churchill allowed her to go, and in fact it
would be Dickie who would get into trouble with him on the trip, for inviting a

controversial journalist aboard the HMS Surprise.78
When Nehru emerged from Buckingham Palace with Indira in tow, he saw Churchill
waiting for his car, and went to greet him. Afterwards, Churchill said to Indira, ‘I didn’t
expect it. This man whom I have jailed so many times has conquered hate. He acts
without a trace of rancour.’79 Indira noticed that there were tears in Churchill’s eyes as
he spoke.
The defrosting of relations between Churchill and Nehru which occurred at the
coronation seems to have precipitated a change in the former’s attitude to India. ‘If I
had been returned in 1945 I would have introduced a constituent assembly for India,’
Churchill told Rab Butler and Lord Salisbury over lunch at Chequers shortly afterwards.
‘Of course, they might have got rid of us anyway, but I’d have liked to try.’ He regretted
that the British had not befriended the Indians, and had instead dealt with them only in
political terms.80
Churchill even invited Nehru’s sister, Nan Pandit, then Indian High Commissioner to
Britain, to visit him at Chartwell while he recovered from a stroke. He was not supposed
to drink alcohol or walk in the garden to show her his prized carp, and within minutes
had done both. When he noticed his security guards following discreetly down the
garden, remembered Nan, ‘he ared into a temper that was so like my father, the
similarity could not be ignored and I had di culty in restraining a smile.’ The pair of
them sat on a bench, and Churchill put his hand on Nan’s arm.
‘We killed your husband, didn’t we?’ he said. Ranjit Pandit, a gentle, unassuming
Sanskrit scholar, had been imprisoned with Jawahar and most of the rest of the family
following Quit India. A sentence in a British jail had made his asthma and pleurisy
worse, and he died in 1944, shortly after his release. Nan was so taken aback at
Churchill’s words that she did not know what to say.
‘Every man only lives to his appointed hour,’ she replied eventually.81
Britain’s wrongs against the Nehru family were not so readily forgiven by Nan’s cook,
Budhilal. Some years after her meeting with Churchill, Nan was hosting an
ambassadorial dinner for his successor, Anthony Eden. Budhilal, who had been at the
ale, staged a strike in the kitchen, declaring that he would never cook for the prime
minister of a nation that had imprisoned Nan, and wielding a soup ladle in an emphatic
manner. Taken aback, Nan returned to her guests in the drawing room, and whispered
her plight to Edwina Mountbatten. Having organized refugee camps for hundreds of
thousands, Edwina had little trouble getting the dinner party together. Over dessert, she
revealed the truth to Nan’s guests, who found it rather funny. ‘My mother, slowly
emerging from a state of shock, was even able to manage a wan smile,’ added Nan’s
daughter.82
After forty years of e ort, Mountbatten nally stepped into his father’s shoes and
became First Sea Lord in 1955. The following year came the Suez crisis, that last and
most foolhardy ourish of British imperial delusion. ‘Thank goodness Philip isn’t here,’
remarked the Queen, on being told that the Egyptian dictator Gamal Abdel Nasser had

nationalized the Suez Canal.83 Dickie Mountbatten was around, and he opposed
Britain’s invasion wholeheartedly, as did his wife and Jawaharlal Nehru. Mountbatten
was told by the Ministry of Defence that he had no right to give political advice.
Immediately, he offered his resignation to Eden; it was refused.84
There were other ways to make his views heard. In his unique position of con dant to
the monarch, Mountbatten was heard to whisper in her ear that, ‘I think they are being
absolutely lunatic.’85 Acting on Mountbatten’s word, Elizabeth exercised her
constitutional right to advise Eden not to invade. He exercised his constitutional right to
ignore her. Britain invaded; the United States cut o its credit; and Eden was forced into
a humiliating withdrawal. He resigned the following year. Mountbatten was promoted
to Chief of the Defence Staff.
It is said that Dickie became a particularly close con dant of the Queen during the
1950s.86 He always carried four pictures with him: Edwina as a young woman in white
fur and pearls, one each of Patricia and Pamela, and one of Elizabeth, smiling, relaxed
and unusually sexy in a white gown and long gloves. It was signed ‘Lilibet’, the
nickname by which her intimate circle have always known her.87
In April 1958, Nehru announced that he wanted to resign and return to private life,
telling a press conference shortly afterwards that he felt ‘rather stale and at’. 88 For
once, the roles were reversed, and Edwina told him to take a rest. He took a month’s
holiday, trekking in the Kullu Valley, high in the Himalayas. ‘Tell me whether I should
continue to write to you or not?’ wrote Edwina tentatively. ‘I shall well understand if
you say “not a note for the next months”.’
Jawahar wrote back passionately. ‘How do you think I would fare if months passed
without a letter from you?’ he asked. ‘Have you realized what your letters mean to
me?’89 Two months later, in July, the Economic Weekly published an anonymous article
under the headline ‘After Nehru’, predicting that on his departure Congress would
fragment into petty interests of caste, religion and region. Remembering the Chanakya
article of 1937, some wondered whether Nehru had written another anonymous diatribe
against himself.90 Only the sustained pleading of his colleagues persuaded Nehru to stay
in o ce after his vacation – in opposition to the views of his closest friends. ‘I
understand only too well J.L [Jawahar Lal]’s desire to quit his o ce’, wrote Amrit Kaur
to Edwina, ‘and I only wish he had lived up to what his inner voice told him.’91
Mountbatten believed that Nehru wanted to ‘die with his boots on’, but there is no
reason to doubt the sincerity of his wish to retire.92 Amrit Kaur wrote to Edwina the
following year: ‘I never see JL. I feel sorry for him because he is a lonely person.’93 He
talked to Indira’s friend Marie Seton at length about his desperation to visit a tea shop
or a bookstore without being mobbed. ‘The trouble with power is that one doesn’t know
if one is still a human being or not,’ he told her. ‘I want to remain human.’94
His depression worsened as India’s relations with China deteriorated. Nehru had
always believed in pan-Asian identity. In 1958, China invaded Tibet, sending refugees

scattering across the border into India – including the Dalai Lama himself, who set up
court at Dharamsala in the Himalayas. ‘It is going to be heavy weather all round’, wrote
Nehru to Indira.95 It was she who persuaded her father to o er asylum to the Dalai
Lama, which he did – to the intense annoyance of the Chinese government. By the
middle of 1959, many were predicting that China would invade India next. ‘Look at the
terrain, and tell me how the Chinese can invade,’ Mountbatten told American troops in
South Carolina on 12 October 1959. ‘I’d hate to plan that campaign.’96 Nine days later,
Chinese troops entered Indian territory in Ladakh, high in the mountains of Kashmir.97
That troubled state would henceforth be disputed between three nations.
The rst society event of 1960 was the wedding of Pamela Mountbatten to the interior
designer David Hicks. Noël Coward, among the guests, remembered it as being ‘hilarious
and most enjoyable’. Hampshire was hit by a blizzard, and all the lights at Broadlands
fused during the reception. Afterwards, when a coach left for the station, it broke down
before it got out of the drive. The guests inside, including Walter Monckton’s wife,
Biddy, and Coward himself, had to get out into the snow in their morning suits and silk
gowns, and push.98
The following day, 17 January 1960, the Sunday Express reported that the name of
Mountbatten was to be restored to the royal house. Three weeks later, the Queen
announced that ‘while I and my children shall continue to be styled and known as the
House of Windsor, my descendants other than descendants enjoying the style, title or
attribute of Royal Highness and the titular dignity of Prince or Princess and female
descendants who marry and their descendants shall bear the name of MountbattenWindsor.’99
Edwina did not stay around to enjoy her husband’s triumph. On the day after her
daughter’s wedding, she left for Delhi. There she met Jawahar again: seventy now, to
her fty-eight, but still looking remarkably young. The same could not be said for her.
Edwina’s face was lined, but her delight at seeing Jawahar illuminated it. The e ect was
clear to everyone.100 On 26 January, the pair of them attended the Indian Republic Day
parade, and a reception afterwards in the Mughal Gardens. Memories of the magical
night of 15 August 1947, when so many of the same people had celebrated in the same
garden, hung in the air. Edwina and Jawahar chatted with the guest of honour, the
Russian President, Marshal Voroshilov. Marie Seton was struck by Edwina’s radiance.
‘She moved easily about, unconcerned, talking to people with unselfconscious vivacity’,
she wrote; ‘as she talked she shed the charm of her independent spirit.’ Observing
Edwina and Jawahar together, she noted, ‘Some people believed that she exerted a great
in uence on Jawaharlal, but at least one of his friends was of the opinion that it was
she who hung on every word he said.’101 In fact, their admiration was mutual, and
undiminished by the passing years.
The days were lled with charity work, and the evenings with quiet dinners at
Jawahar’s house. One afternoon, Jawahar hosted a display of folk dancing from all over
India. Seton was present again, and was able to see the happiness of Jawahar and

Edwina rst-hand. Every group of dancers wanted to be photographed with Jawahar,
and Seton delighted in watching him ‘caper around with group after group’, now
wearing a tribal cloak, now a skull-cap, now a garland of owers. Seton sat down with
Edwina on the grass to watch a troupe of war dancers from Nagaland, spinning and
dipping fiercely, clad in little more than feathers.
Edwina turned to Marie and remarked, ‘Don’t they have beautiful bottoms?’
‘Very beautiful,’ Marie replied.102
Soon afterwards, Edwina left Delhi for Malaya, and hopped from there to Singapore,
Brunei, and nally Borneo, arriving on 18 February. She was driven to the house of
Robert Noel Turner, Chief Secretary of North Borneo, and his wife Evelyn. After only a
brief rest, she went on to the St John Ambulance headquarters. That night, Turner was
impressed with her vivacity at their dinner party.103
The next morning, the heavy mountain mists brie y cleared, and Evelyn Turner woke
Edwina at seven to show her the spectacular view. Edwina emerged on to the balcony in
a silk dressing-gown to look up at the heights of Mount Kinabalu. ‘It’s venerated by the
Dusuns who live on the lower slopes,’ Turner told her. ‘They believe it is the resting
place of the souls of the dead.’104 The mists rose again only minutes later and obscured
the mountain once more.
When Edwina returned to the house that evening, she complained of tiredness. The
Turners’ secretary suggesting calling a doctor, but Edwina would not have it. She got
herself up again and went to the St John dinner that evening. When she arrived back at
the house, she almost collapsed; but, righting herself, she dismissed it as only a headache
and went to bed, refusing even an aspirin. The next day, Edwina grudgingly submitted
to a medical examination. The doctor thought she had in uenza, or early stage malaria;
but she would not be put o her programme, and continued on to two hospital visits
and a co ee party before nally allowing Mrs Turner to send her to bed with an egg
ip. She insisted on attending a St John parade and an o cial reception that evening.
Guests noticed that she looked pale and drawn despite her e orts to smile, and that she
left after only twenty minutes.
At 7.30 the next morning, the Turners’ secretary knocked on Edwina’s door. There was
no reply. She opened it to see the Countess Mountbatten of Burma lying on the bed. Her
body was already cold. She had su ered heart failure a few hours before. Still one of the
world’s richest women, she had had no splendid possessions with her: only a pile of old
letters on the bedside table. She must have been reading them when she died, for a few,
having uttered from her hands, were strewn across her bed. They were all from
Jawaharlal Nehru.105
In Delhi, Marie Seton was waiting to hear the historian Arnold Toynbee lecture at
Sapru House, when she saw Jawahar arrive. ‘I noticed that his face was expressionless
and self-contained, and that he took no notice of anyone.’ When the audience sat down
in the hall, the chairman rose to announce that Edwina Mountbatten had died that
morning. A gasp ran through the hall, and everyone rose to their feet for a spontaneous
memorial silence. Seton and her friends were deeply concerned for Nehru. ‘Despite the
self-control he demonstrated at the Toynbee lecture, I think it [Edwina’s] was the death

which left him most bereft of companionship’, she wrote; ‘she was the friend who had
stimulated and encouraged him most.’106 Just as after the death of Gandhi, Nehru’s
public face would be a mask, hiding his private grief.
Back in Britain, Mountbatten received over 6000 letters and telegrams of condolence,
which were delivered almost hourly to Broadlands by the Post O ce. Dickie’s valet
found him in the drawing room, crumpling one between his trembling ngers and
weeping.107 Three months later, Noël Coward met him for lunch, and noted that he had
‘aged a good deal since Edwina’s death’.108 Dickie could not sleep properly for the next
three years.109
Edwina had a horror of being interred in the claustrophobic family vault at Romsey
Abbey, and had asked her husband to bury her ‘in a sack at sea’.110 HMS Wakeful was
o ered by the Admiralty, and sailed from Portsmouth. The co n was discharged into
the waves from beneath a Union Jack. Mountbatten, in tears, kissed a wreath of owers
before throwing it into the sea.111 The Wakeful was escorted by an Indian frigate, the
Trishul. Jawaharlal Nehru had sent it all the way to the English Channel, just to cast a
wreath of marigolds into the waves after Edwina’s coffin.

CHAPTER 20: ECHOES

AFTER EDWINA’S DEATH, JAWAHAR HAD NOT PERMITTED HIMSELF public grief; but the age he had de ed for
so many years began to catch up with him. His face pu ed, and developed liver spots.
He began to resemble his father in the latter’s last years. He went to London, fell ill, and
had to be examined by the Queen’s physician and a kidney specialist. Marie Seton saw
him a few months later, and believed him to be ‘dying by inches’, crushed under the
burden of responsibility he felt for the collapse of relations with China, and deprived of
the close friends who had supported him.1 Politically, he had become erratic. Nan Pandit
wrote to Dickie Mountbatten, asking him to tell her brother to delegate more: ‘The only
person who could control him was darling Edwina,’ Dickie replied.2 The question of his
successor began to bother a wider circle of people. ‘The Prime Minister is like the great
banyan tree,’ said S.K. Patil, the Minister for Food. ‘Thousands shelter beneath it but
nothing grows.’3 The remark irritated Nehru, perhaps because it was true.
Another trip was planned, this time to the United States. Relations between India and
the United States had long been frosty, owing to American support for Pakistan on one
side, and Indian support for China on the other.4 However, when John F. Kennedy
became President, heaping praise on Nehru’s ‘soaring idealism’, there was some hope of
a thaw.5 A visit by Nehru was planned for November 1961.
On 6 November, Nehru arrived in New York with Indira. The Kennedys took them
aboard Air Force One for the ight to Washington. The President read the papers, while
the First Lady immersed herself in the writings of André Malraux. Nehru read the
National Geographic and the New York Daily News. Indira icked through a copy of
Vogue.6
The formal talks began the next day. Kennedy brought up a range of topics which
usually interested Nehru very much – Berlin, Vietnam, nuclear testing, Indo-Pakistani
relations – and yet the Indian premier seemed out of sorts, and could not be induced to
grunt out more than a sentence or two in reply.7 The meeting nally ended at 12.30,
and Kennedy, crestfallen, went for a walk on the back lawn with the American
Ambassador to India, J.K. Galbraith. ‘He thought he had done badly,’ Galbraith
remembered; ‘I fail to see how he could have done better.’8
That evening Nehru dined with Kennedy. During the dinner, Nehru eased up
considerably – not least, noted Galbraith, because he ‘had sat between Mrs. Kennedy
and her sister and with the light of love in his eyes’.9 The rest of the trip went without a
hitch.
There was not long to wait for the sequel. On 13 March 1962, Jackie Kennedy
descended from an Air India jet at New Delhi, accompanied by her sister, Lee Radziwill.
Jawahar himself stood waiting for them at the bottom of the ramp. The next evening,

she went to a party at Teen Murti Bhavan. In the light of a half-moon, traditional
dancers and musicians performed on a stage. From among a sea of beautiful and
elaborate saris, Jackie emerged in a simple, oor-sweeping dress of lambent turquoise.
‘I am having a signal lack of success in soft-pedaling emphasis on clothes,’ admitted
Galbraith.10 She sat with Jawahar under a canopy made of ower petals to watch the
show. Both she and her sister were charmed, Lee describing him as ‘the most fascinating,
gentle and sensual man I ever met’.11
Two days later was the Hindu spring festival, Holi, and Galbraith took Jackie to Teen
Murti Bhavan to say goodbye to Jawahar. Motilal Nehru had begun a family tradition of
standing outside his house at Holi, wearing a dhoti and kurta in spotless white, and
waiting for the huge crowds which trampled up the driveway to embrace him and cover
him in red and purple festive powders. ‘By the time they nished he was a chromatic
mess and he loved it,’ remembered Betty.12 Jawahar continued this tradition as Prime
Minister. When Jackie arrived, she found him outside the house, wearing a white
sherwani, laughing as thousands of people turned up to pelt him with paint, powder
and water. ‘Oh, I must do that, too!’ she exclaimed.13
The First Lady had made a tremendous impression in India. Soon afterwards,
Galbraith called on Nehru. ‘I noticed, incidentally, that in his upstairs sitting room
where he has pictures of the really important people in his life – Gandhi, Motilal Nehru
(his father), Tagore and Edwina Mountbatten – there is now a signi cant addition, to
wit: Mrs. Jacqueline B. Kennedy. It is the picture of J.B.K. and the Prime Minister
walking arm in arm in the White House garden.’14
Open war with China that year invigorated him brie y. ‘Nehru looked younger and
more vigorous than at any time in recent months,’ noted Galbraith, ‘and told me that
the tension of the crisis agreed with him.’15 Mountbatten visited in 1963, and they
talked extensively about Kashmir, though more extensively still about Edwina. ‘This is
almost the rst time he has been prepared to talk freely about her,’ Mountbatten wrote
in his diary, ‘and we both exchanged sentimental memories of the time we were all
together in India.’16 It was a warm remembrance, but Nehru was declining.
The British High Commissioner in Delhi reported back to London on 3 January 1964
that the succession was ‘sewn up’ for Indira Gandhi, ‘the one thing in which the Prime
Minister was now really interested’.17 Overall, the signs were that Nehru had not
groomed Indira for the succession. He had supported her when she turned down
government jobs, though he had not stood in her way when she took them. But, as his
friends and colleagues melted away, she remained a constant companion, and his clarity
of democratic vision seemed to blur. There was by no means universal support for her in
government circles. When Mountbatten visited India shortly after the British High
Commissioner had made his report, he and the President, Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan,
agreed that Indira should not be given the external a airs portfolio that her father was
apparently thinking of granting her.18
Jawahar had a minor stroke in January at the annual Congress session in
Bhubaneshwar. Dickie visited again, and found his old friend ‘shockingly weak and
uncomprehending’.19 He urged him not to keep working at-out. ‘That is what Edwina

did, to the great distress of all who loved her whom she left behind’, he wrote.20 On 27
May, Jawahar rose at dawn and su ered a second stroke and a heart attack. He lost
consciousness and, a few hours later, he died.
Two enormous blocks of ice were placed either side of Jawahar’s body, which lay in
state at Teen Murti Bhavan in temperatures of 110 degrees, surrounded by garlands of
lilies, roses, bougainvillea and, of course, Indian marigolds.21 The crowds were so thick
that cars could not pass, and Nehru’s sisters were obliged to struggle through on foot.22
His friends came to look upon his sad-looking but peaceful countenance, and pay their
respects. The rst Englishman to arrive was Dickie Mountbatten, who ew in with the
British Prime Minister, Sir Alec Douglas-Home. There were the women who had loved
Nehru, too: Mridula Sarabhai, a scion of one of India’s leading industrial families, in a
white khadi salwar kameez, self-possessed and meditative; Padmaja Naidu, wandering
about sadly as if lost, looking suddenly aged. ‘Padmaja had never married,’ noted Marie
Seton, ‘perhaps ever hoping to be asked by the man she so much loved.’23
Soon, Nehru’s house was lled with uninvited guests – Hindu pandits, Buddhist lamas,
Muslim maulvis and Christian priests – who sat by his body and recited prayers. Nehru’s
will had stated, ‘I wish to declare with an earnestness that I do not want any religious
ceremonies performed for me after my death. I do not believe in any such ceremonies
and to submit to them, even as a matter of form, would be hypocrisy.’24 His daughter
and his government had seen t to disregard this unambiguous wish. The crowds at his
funeral were said to exceed even those who had turned out for Gandhi’s, most clad in
the traditional white of Indian mourning. Hundreds of thousands – some reports said
millions – stood in a mile-long crescent around the ridge. There was an atmosphere of
quiet reflection, rather than grief, that impressed all the foreign observers.25
Jawahar’s younger grandson, Sanjay Gandhi, lit the pyre. ‘The face most contorted by
emotion was not an Indian face,’ remembered Marie Seton, ‘but that of the once blithe
Louis Mountbatten. He appeared to sag at the sight of the alabaster head of
Jawaharlal … Theirs had been a harmony of di erence, cemented by their mutual
admiration for the Mahatma, on the one hand, and the very human Edwina, on the
other.’26 Dickie’s admiration for the Mahatma might have been retrospective, but it was
beyond doubt that he and Jawahar had been brought together by their love of the same
woman.
The scent of sandalwood and camphor oil drifted into the afternoon heat as the priests
Jawahar had disdained all his life chanted mantras around his body.27 Perhaps inspired
by the recurring dream of his childhood, Nehru had requested that most of his ashes be
scattered from an aeroplane, ‘so that they might mingle with the dust and soil of India
and become an indistinguishable part of India’.
‘Now that Nehru is gone we shall no longer have the enormously valuable access to the
India Government’s inner councils which Lord Mountbatten’s personal friendship with
him gave us at crucial moments,’ complained the British High Commission in Delhi.28
Mountbatten himself had other things to worry about. Douglas-Home’s Conservative

government lost an election, and a Labour administration under Harold Wilson came in.
Mountbatten soon clashed with Denis Healey, his new boss at the Ministry of Defence.
Mountbatten wanted to abandon the separate Chiefs of Sta and integrate the three
services into one department; Healey suspected that Mountbatten really wanted more
control for himself. ‘I doubt if anyone else in my time could have met the requirements
of a Chief of Defence Sta as Mountbatten conceived the post’, wrote Healey; ‘few other
officers shared his confidence in his own qualifications for such a job.’29
Mountbatten attracted the disapproval of his colleagues by attempting to have himself
made a Field Marshal and an Air Marshal, in addition to an Admiral, prompting an
o cial to write icily to the Prime Minister that ‘only members of the Royal Family have
held ve-star rank in all three Services’.30 During this period Sir Gerald Templer, Chief
of the General Sta , allegedly remarked to Mountbatten’s face that, ‘Dickie, you’re so
bloody crooked that if you swallowed a nail, you’d shit a corkscrew!’31
Sidelined, Mountbatten occupied his time with reorganizational fantasies and
technological ights of fancy. His great ally was his Chief Scienti c Adviser, Sir Solly
Zuckerman, a scientist distinguished originally in the eld of monkey and ape
behavioural science. Zuckerman had been involved in government work since before the
Second World War, when someone at the Ministry of War, concerned with the e ects of
bomb blasts on the human body, apparently said: ‘What about calling in that monkey
fellow?’32 Many exploded chimps later, it was conclusively established that the e ect
was detrimental.33 But Zuckerman had caught the eye of Dickie Mountbatten, who had
appointed him to his sta at Combined Operations. By the 1960s, the two men formed
what was known in Whitehall as the ‘Zuckbatten Axis’, bent on spreading technological
innovation throughout the services.34
Mountbatten’s interest in science occasionally crossed the line into science ction, and
he was keen for the Ministry of Defence to spend its time investigating the paranormal.
He was excited when a giant carcass was found on the west coast of Tasmania, with no
recognizable head, eyes or appendages. He sent news clippings to Zuckerman,
wondering whether it might be a sea-monster, and badgered him to take the matter up
with the Zoological Society. Zuckerman replied that, ‘It has been determined that it is “a
lump of whale meat”.’ Having been defeated over his sea-monster, Mountbatten looked
to the skies. ‘I have long been fascinated by Flying Saucers’, he wrote to Zuckerman a
few months later, enclosing an imaginative magazine article on the subject. ‘Should
Flying Saucers not be investigated further?’ Zuckerman wrote a kindly reply, explaining
that it was not possible to establish conditions under which ying saucers might be
impartially observed. ‘It is the same problem as with ghosts,’ he noted, perhaps hoping
to forestall his friend’s next initiative.35
When the time came for Dickie’s reappointment to be considered, Healey interviewed
the top forty people in the Ministry of Defence. Only one supported Mountbatten’s
reappointment, and that was an old friend of his – Sir Kenneth Strong, the Director
General of Intelligence. ‘When I told Dickie of my decision not to reappoint him, he
slapped his thigh and roared with delight,’ Healey remembered; ‘but his eyes told a

different story.’36
In retirement, there would be little for Dickie to do – though this never stopped him
from doing it. He ran the Nehru Memorial Trust, raising £100,000 by 1966 to fund
Indian scholars at British universities.37 He organized the Nehru Memorial Lecture, and
ensured a decent attendance: Prince Charles was induced to leave a day’s shooting on
his twentieth birthday to show up.38 Harold Wilson considered sending him to Rhodesia
to sort out Ian Smith after that country’s white minority declaration of independence in
1965; Mountbatten leapt at the chance, and the Queen was in favour, but her courtiers
quashed the idea.39 He was made responsible for a government report on prison reform.
He made documentaries, taking a hand in the BBC’s notorious Royal Family, held by
many commentators to have been the beginning of widespread public disrespect for the
monarchy; in the programme the Queen bought an ice lolly, and Prince Philip was seen
to barbecue a sausage.40 There was also a twelve-part series on himself to be fussed
over, presenting his reputation as a great British hero. He was unwilling to share his
script with the government, which worried about the political e ect in Pakistan of his
self-aggrandizing attitude.41 It was easy to see what they meant. At the end of the series,
Dickie’s summing up was characteristic: ‘All I want to know is: was I right, were they
wrong?’ he asked. ‘Will they eventually come round and see it? Or are they so dumb
that it will have to be their children or grandchildren who will perhaps see this series of
lms in fty years’ time and see that I was fairly reasonable and the people who
thought I was wrong were the ones who were unreasonable.’42
Most of all, though, Mountbatten wrote letters. The phrase ‘letters in green ink’ has
long been used in the media to denote an eccentric strain of correspondence from
members of the public. Mountbatten’s letters were typed in emerald green, on pale
mint-green paper, embossed with a forest-green crest, and signed dandyishly with his
decisive, upslanting script, ‘Mountbatten of Burma’, in sea green ink. Dozens of these
letters are to be found in the British and Indian national archives. ‘What in God’s name
has happened in the Ministry of Defence?’ he wrote to Solly Zuckerman, before
launching into a diatribe against nuclear weapons.43 ‘I have been so worried about the
situation in the sub-continent’, he wrote to General Cariappa of the Indian Army, and
confessed that he had been ‘doing everything I can behind the scenes to try and explain
India’s case’.44 The letters include multiple invitations, such as that extended to Harold
Wilson in May 1966 for a private dinner with Mountbatten. Wilson’s secretary noted at
the top that ‘The Prime Minister does not wish to take this up.’45
After Nehru’s death, there had been no more great gures of independence to step into
his shoes. The man who succeeded him, Lal Bahadur Shastri, had been chosen as the
least objectionable candidate. The possibility of Nehru’s daughter, Indira Gandhi,
becoming Prime Minister had been dismissed as fanciful. But Shastri made her his
Secretary of State for Information and Broadcasting and, when he died suddenly in
January 1966, her name came up again. In a restrained and clever campaign which
would be echoed forty years later by her daughter-in-law, Sonia Gandhi, Indira played a

subtle game of irtation with the media and the party. This only served to endear her to
an electorate which preferred its politicians to play hard to get. Finally, after a great
deal of prevaricating, Indira shyly conceded that she would accept the prime
ministership if the Congress President wished her to do so. ‘I am wholeheartedly
overjoyed at this wonderful turn of events’, wrote Dickie Mountbatten. ‘How delighted
your dear father would have been and Edwina also.’46
President Lyndon B. Johnson was similarly smitten when she visited the United States
in March. ‘What a nice girl, and how beautiful,’ he said to the Indian Ambassador,
describing the forty-eight-year-old woman who had just become Prime Minister of the
world’s largest democracy. He declared an interest in bolstering her support. ‘You tell
me what to do. Send her food? Attack her? I’ll do whatever you say.’ Indira herself,
elding a diplomatic enquiry about how Johnson should address her, showed her true
character. ‘He can call me Madam Prime Minister, he can call me Prime Minister, he can
call me Mr Prime Minister if he wants,’ she snapped. ‘You can tell him that my
colleagues call me “Sir”.’47
Unlike Jawahar, Indira found the processes of democratic government irritating and
cumbersome. Soon she started to act without recourse to it. ‘My position among the
people is uncontested,’ she declared.48 When she attacked the princes for their privy
purses, Mountbatten was shocked and upset. ‘I do hope Indu will do nothing that could
in any way dishonour her father’s word’, he wrote to Nan Pandit, ‘and I have written to
her to this effect in as friendly a way as possible.’49
But Mountbatten’s main worries were closer to home. In London, the spirit of
revolution was also in the air. When the Labour Party had been elected to power, the
rst person that Harold Wilson invited to lunch at 10 Downing Street had been Cecil
King, a large, terse, ambitious newspaper magnate who controlled 40 per cent of the
national circulation.50 King had supported Labour throughout the election, but by the
summer of 1965 he had lost all faith in Wilson.51 King and Hugh Cudlipp, an old friend
and chairman of the Mirror, decided that if Wilson would not change or go, he should be
ousted by force. But who could lead the coup and replace Wilson at the head of a new,
post-democratic administration? The answer had come to them by 12 August 1967, when
King reported: ‘Cudlipp had some talk a few weeks ago with Mountbatten at some
dinner. Hugh asked him if it had been suggested to him that our present style of
government might be in for a change. He said it had. Hugh then asked if it had been
suggested that he might have some part to play in such a new regime? Mountbatten said
it had been suggested, but that he was far too old.’52
The idea oated around for some months before Cudlipp nally set up a meeting
between Mountbatten and King, on 8 May 1968, in Mountbatten’s at on Kinnerton
Street. Solly Zuckerman also attended.53 King launched into a list of Wilson’s failings. If
the government continued as it was, he said, the towns would be awash with blood, and
there would be machine guns on street corners. Instead, he proposed a velvet
revolution, but raised the question of who could head the replacement government of
‘national unity’: someone competent and non-partisan, who could command the

confidence of the public.54 Was Mountbatten interested?
Mountbatten was, according to Zuckerman ‘for a moment beguiled’.55 He turned to
Zuckerman and asked him what he thought. Zuckerman got up and went to the door.
‘This is rank treachery,’ he said. ‘I am a public servant and will have nothing to do with
it. Nor should you, Dickie.’56 Mountbatten tried to restrain him for a few moments, but
he walked out. Afterwards, according to King’s diary, Mountbatten told him that morale
in the services was low, and the Queen was ‘desperately worried’ over the situation.57
Cudlipp later admitted that Mountbatten told him he had raised the question of a coup
with the Queen that month.58
Private Eye magazine would later allege that Mountbatten had gone much further with
this plan than this tale allowed, and even that he had begun to compile a list of military
friends who might support him. The magazine claimed that it was Zuckerman who
talked him out of it.59 Rumours in the highest circles at Buckingham Palace suggest the
Eye had the right idea, but the wrong saviour. It was not Solly Zuckerman who talked
Mountbatten out of staging a coup and making himself President of Britain. It was the
Queen herself.60
On 25 June 1970, Earl Mountbatten of Burma celebrated his seventieth birthday. He
threw a weekend party at Broadlands, stocked with British and European royalty and
other dignitaries. When the last of the guests left on the Monday morning, Mountbatten
patted his valet on the shoulder. ‘Charles, that was the best birthday party of my life,’ he
said. ‘Only one person was missing. I wish she had been alive to see it.’61 A decade after
Edwina’s death, he was still mourning.
By the 1970s, Mountbatten had outlived most of those whom he felt were his equals or
superiors in class, style and outlook. Edwina had died in 1960; Alanbrooke in 1963;
Nehru in 1964; Churchill and Ismay in 1965; Peter Murphy in 1966; the Duke of Windsor
would go in 1972. He ate his meals alone in front of the television, watching Panorama,
World in Action, and Horizon. He still enjoyed the company of women, but would not
remarry: a man of his genealogical consciousness would not wish to jeopardize the
position of his existing family, especially when – most unusually – he had secured a
special remainder so that his title might pass to his daughter, Patricia. He was also
obliged to spend some time fending o rumours about guardsmen when, in 1975, his
name was whispered in connection with an exposé in the Daily Mirror about gay orgies
at the Life Guards’ barracks in London. ‘I might have been accused of many things in my
life but hardly of the act of homosexuality’, he wrote indignantly in his diary.62 He was
accused of it again after a maid walked in while a photographer was attempting to
remove the Admiral’s trousers, for reasons apparently connected with portraiture.63 He
had continued his relationship with Yola Letellier.64 But any thoughts Mountbatten had
about marrying other women were crowded out by the memory of Edwina. ‘If I lived for
another hundred years,’ he told his valet, ‘I would not meet another woman to compare
with Her Ladyship.’65
With all his fancies of leading the nation returning to the dust whence they had come,

Dickie was left functionless again. He took up any number of charitable presidencies
and patronages. No Boy Scout troupe went unaddressed, no dinner-dance unattended,
no regional administrative o ce unopened. The Queen took pity on him and made him
Governor of the Isle of Wight, his childhood home. The former Viceroy of mighty India,
who had wielded the power of life or, often, death over 400 million people, was entitled
in this new role to attend council luncheons. With his great friend, Barbara Cartland, he
collaborated on a romance novel, Love at the Helm. The hero is a dashing naval o cer,
Captain Conrad ‘Tiger’ Horn, with a penchant for neatly kept uniforms.66
Indira Gandhi won a massive victory in the 1971 elections. That year, East Pakistan
rebelled against West Pakistan. Indira sent troops to aid the rebels, and following an
horrific civil war, East Pakistan seceded from Jinnah’s dream to become Bangladesh.
In June 1975, Nan Pandit was in London for a wedding. She was queuing for
breakfast at the Indian Students’ Hostel when she heard that, following accusations of
electoral malpractice, an ‘emergency’ had been declared in India. Indira had suspended
all human rights: property could not be owned, professions could not be pursued, and
there was no freedom of movement, association, or speech. Total censorship had been
imposed, especially on quotations about freedom from the writings of Gandhi, Nehru
and Tagore. ‘It was reminiscent of the midnight knock of forty years ago in Hitler’s
Germany,’ Nan remembered.67
The emergency was a time of terror. Bulldozers cleared deprived areas, whose
inhabitants were given as little as forty- ve minutes’ notice to vacate them, in order to
make way for property developers under the slogan ‘Make Delhi Beautiful’.68 Indira’s
son, Sanjay, ran a programme to tackle overpopulation. His sterilization campaign put
so much pressure on provincial o cials to show results that stories became common of
men being kidnapped and forcibly castrated, and the same men being operated upon
two or even three times to make up the gures. Indira had her favourite slogan – ‘Indira
is India, and India is Indira’ – displayed in colossal letters around the arcades of
Connaught Circus.69
Mountbatten was horri ed. ‘I cannot tell you how in nitely saddened I am at what is
being done to the memory of your great brother, Jawaharlal’, he wrote to Nan. ‘It is a
tragedy, of course, that his own daughter, Indu, and that unfortunate young son of hers,
Sanjay, should have behaved in such a way during the Emergency, to make it possible
for the name of Nehru to be besmirched.’70 Indira cancelled the emergency on 18
January 1977 and called an election, in the belief that she would win it. She did not,
and a rickety coalition of Hindu nationalists, Sikhs, farmers and the extreme right took
over. Indira was shocked and hurt, more so yet when the new government imprisoned
her. For all her ‘Indira is India’ rhetoric, she had badly misjudged the popular
temperature.71
Dickie had agreed with Nan that he would not see Indira publicly on her visit to
London after her release in 1978, but would invite her to see him privately.72 Had he
not wished to draw attention to the meeting, he could have picked a less conspicuous

middleman. On 13 November, Barbara Cartland – in trademark searing pink and
feathers, and with a white Pekingese dog under her arm – arrived at Claridge’s to whisk
o Mrs Gandhi in her Rolls Royce Silver Cloud. They drove to Dickie’s at and stayed
for half an hour, for what can only have been an uncomfortable chat. ‘We managed to
keep o the Emergency’, Dickie reported to Nan, ‘and to talk in a friendly way about
the old days with her father and you and the family generally.’73 Reporters congregated
to observe the surreal scene. Did Indira read Miss Cartland’s books, they wondered –
with an eye to the Indian setting of her 249th novel, Flowers for the God of Love,
published that week? ‘Of course she does,’ snapped Miss Cartland.74 And what on earth
did the three of them talk about, the crumbling semi-royal playboy, the disgraced Indian
dictator, and the romance novelist? ‘We discussed in ation,’ replied Miss Cartland, then
slammed shut the door of her car, and drove Indira back to the hotel.75
Dickie’s main focus became that of his own dynastic succession, through the proxy of
the Prince of Wales. Mountbatten had been behind the decisions to send Prince Charles
to Gordonstoun, Cambridge and the Navy; he had encouraged him to play polo; he had
provided the younger man with a weekend place away from his parents at Broadlands,
to which girlfriends could be invited; he had even tried, and failed, to persuade Philip
and Elizabeth to have their son’s ears pinned back before he went to school, which
might have spared him a great deal of bullying from classmates and, later, the media.76
In the summer of 1979, he was orchestrating a putative relationship between Charles
and a pretty young aristocrat called the Hon. Amanda Knatchbull. Miss Knatchbull
happened to be Mountbatten’s granddaughter, and the opportunity to strengthen the
concentration of his own blood in the royal veins was too delicious for the ageing
schemer to pass up. He attempted to organize a trip to India, taking Charles and
Amanda with him, but the potential for press intrusion put an end to that. Instead, he
wrote to Nan that he might come alone, for he wanted to visit ‘the Ajunta [sic] Caves
which I have never actually seen myself’.77 The opposition of Amanda’s parents to
Mountbatten’s matchmaking, and the apparent lack of attraction between the couple,
doomed the relationship.
In the summer of 1979, Mountbatten set o for his usual August holiday at Cli oney
in Eire. He had been warned about the threat of terrorism from the Irish Republican
Army, then active on both sides of the border. ‘The IRA are not looking for an old man
like me,’ he told his valet.78 On the morning of 27 August, Mountbatten was up early
and bustling around Classiebawn Castle, a Victorian gothic house in Sligo that had been
inherited many years before by Edwina. Meanwhile, down at the nearby harbour of
Mullaghmore, one or more Provisional IRA operatives levered up the green-painted
planks in the centre aft of the Mountbatten family’s shing boat, the Shadow V. They
packed twenty- ve kilogrammes of ammonium nitrate and nitroglycerine, mixed to
form a gelignite explosive, into the hull, and attached a remote detonator before
withdrawing to the hillside by the quay.
Mountbatten was to spend the day aboard the Shadow V with his daughter Patricia
and her husband, Lord Brabourne, along with their teenaged twin sons, Nicholas and
Timothy Knatchbull. Lord Brabourne’s mother, Doreen, and a local lad called Paul

Maxwell, completed the party. Shortly before lunchtime they motored into Donegal Bay.
As they got into open water Lord Brabourne turned to his father-in-law and said, ‘You
are having fun today, aren’t you?’79 At that moment, the terrorists pressed their button,
and a massive explosion blasted the Shadow V into woodchips. Paul Maxwell, Nick
Knatchbull and Earl Mountbatten of Burma were killed instantly; the others seriously
injured – in the dowager Lady Brabourne’s case, fatally. Patricia remembered thinking
about how her father had been sunk on the Kelly thirty-eight years before, and how he
had told her he covered his nose and mouth to prevent himself from drowning. She was
very nearly killed as well and was to spend weeks on a lifesupport machine. ‘My father
had always been particular that the boat should be fully painted,’ she remembered years
later. ‘I’ve still got some in my eyes, which is rather nice. I like having a souvenir of the
boat.’80 Mountbatten was found oating face down in the water. He had told friends he
wished to die at sea.81
In the summer of 1907, a Cambridge undergraduate called Jawaharlal Nehru had visited
Dublin. He had been thrilled by the reaction of the dissident political group Sinn Fein,
when they were excluded from a nationalist meeting at Mansion House. They simply
held a rally outside it, attracting far more spectators than were inside – including
Jawahar himself. ‘Their policy is not to beg for favours but to wrest them’, he had
written to his father, Motilal. ‘They do not want to ght England by arms but “to ignore
her, boycott her and quietly assume the administration of Irish a airs”.’ 82 Had
Jawaharlal Nehru been alive in 1979, he would have been horri ed by the actions of the
Provisional IRA in the name of the same cause. And it would not have passed him by
that the target was inappropriate. Mountbatten was no colonial oppressor or Unionist
stooge. He died because he was posh.
Mountbatten had spent many happy hours planning his own funeral. ‘How very
macabre,’ remarked his son-in-law, Lord Brabourne. ‘Doesn’t it upset you?’ ‘The only
thing that upsets me is that I won’t be there,’ Mountbatten had replied.83 Everything for
this last great show went o just as the old man would have wanted, from the six scarlet
cushions he had ordered to bear his crowns and crests, to the perfectly chosen hymns –
‘He Who Would Valiant Be’ and ‘For Those in Peril on the Sea’.84 One unplanned detail
was a wreath that read ‘From H.G.S. to H.G.F.’, signifying ‘from honorary grandson to
honorary grandfather’.85 ‘Life will never be the same now that he has gone’, wrote the
honorary grandson, Charles, Prince of Wales, in his diary.86 Ashley Hicks, Mountbatten’s
real grandson, summed it up the best. ‘For Grandpapa, in a way it was the most
tremendous of all ends,’ he said. ‘It stopped him from going gaga; it stopped him from
fading into obscurity and it stopped people from being sorry for him. It was the most
marvellously dramatic end.’87
Today, the India created by the Mountbattens, Nehru, Gandhi and Jinnah is on the way
up. Mercedes-Benz and BMW cars hurtle around Connaught Circus alongside rickshaws

and the occasional wandering cow; glass-panelled corporate headquarters tower over
the internet cafés and sportswear shops that now ll the colonnades that were
ransacked by a civil war only sixty years ago. The Punjab is rich again, both in India
and in Pakistan. New cities have sprung up on both sides of its border to proclaim the
proud, modernist ambitions of those nations. The Indian Punjab has Chandigarh, an
elegant sprawl designed, at Nehru’s request, by Le Corbusier. The Pakistani Punjab has
Islamabad, now the nation’s capital. India’s great cities boom with industry, from the
lms and nance of Bombay to the infotech and biotech of Bangalore. Pakistan’s great
cities have not enjoyed the same prosperity. Despite the patronage it has received from
the United States, the burgeoning of radical Islam in parts of Pakistan and its political
volatility has made it a less appetising prospect for foreign investors.
Neither Nehru nor Jinnah has bequeathed exactly the legacy he would have wanted to
his nation. Nehru’s vision encompassed an inclusive democracy, a planned economy,
and substantial investment in education. Some of these have fallen by the wayside, and
he would have been horri ed to observe the religious violence, disregard for the
environment, and callousness towards the poor that have beleaguered India since his
death. Others have succeeded remarkably, notably in the culture of science and
technology, the availability of education, and the principle of secular democracy. But
Nehru had seventeen years at the head of India to make his mark. Jinnah had just one
at the head of Pakistan. After his death, there was little by the way of strong leadership
beyond Liaquat Ali Khan, who was assassinated in 1951 in Rawalpindi. Into the vacuum
rushed an assortment of religious fundamentalists and military dictators, and the
political history of Pakistan in the sixty years following independence has been one of
constant struggle, with democracy pitted against corruption, extremism, the military,
and foreign interests. India has su ered no shortage of corruption or extremism either,
but, with one brief exception during Indira Gandhi’s prime ministership in the 1970s,
democracy has held.
Serious problems face each part of the former British Indian Empire. Like India,
Pakistan is a beautiful and fascinating country, with a massive pool of native English
speakers, and incredible potential for tourism, commerce and industry. But if it is to
catch up with India’s economic pace it will need greater stability and a rebuilding of
Jinnah’s progressive ideals. Bangladesh, the nation that was designed to be unworkable,
has seen some economic growth, but is constrained by its climate and geography. Every
year, the monsoon rains swell the tributaries of the Ganges, Brahmaputra and Meghna
rivers, and a huge part of Bangladesh oods. Droughts and cyclones add to the nation’s
woes, while its population continues to rise. Meanwhile, India’s impressive development
statistics mask a society split by some of the most shocking divisions of wealth visible
anywhere in the world. E orts to alleviate poverty and eradicate caste have progressed,
but at a painfully slow pace. In many parts of the country, India’s new rich enjoy their
fabulous wealth behind the iron gates and armed guards of private towns, from which
the poor are physically excluded. India su ers simultaneously from the strictures of
poverty and the diseases of a uence. It contains 50 per cent of the world’s hungry, and

more than half of all children under ve are malnourished.88 Simultaneously, India’s
enormous middle class – estimated at around 300 million people – is experiencing an
obesity epidemic.
The structures of British rule are visible everywhere but, in a subcontinent that has
seen dozens of empires come and go, such relics do not seem out of place. In Delhi’s
Imperial Hotel, where Jinnah was nearly murdered by Khaksars, the British raj is now a
selling point. Bollywood stars pop in to enjoy ‘memsahib’s tea’ on the lawn, and spend
50,000 rupees on a handbag in the Chanel boutique. Outside, shoeless, half-starved
children wait at the tra c lights to beg ten-rupee notes from rickshaw passengers. From
each of these notes, in one of the least appropriate tributes imaginable, smiles the face
of Mohandas K. Gandhi.
The Viceroy’s House, later Government House, is now Rashtrapati Bhavan, the home
of the President of the Republic of India. Nehru eventually succeeded in getting rid of
the British crown and won republican status in 1950; the rst president was Rajendra
Prasad, and since then incumbents have included Muslims, a Sikh and a Dalit (the
modern name for Untouchables). Birla House, Gandhi’s last residence, and Teen Murti
House, Nehru’s home, are tourist attractions. Frozen behind glass panels, Mohan’s and
Jawahar’s spectacles, notepads, clothes, shoes and books are displayed like holy relics,
gazed upon by crowds of schoolchildren. There is still a picture of Edwina Mountbatten
in Jawaharlal Nehru’s study.
Up in the hills at Simla, the Viceregal Lodge is now the Indian Institute of Advanced
Studies. Perhaps more than anywhere else in India, Simla provides a snapshot of how
the legacy of the raj has been incorporated into independent Indian life. Half-timbered
shops sell Scottish knitwear alongside glittering sari fabric; restaurants serve pizzas
alongside bhajis. Schoolchildren wear neat uniforms indistinguishable from those of
British public schools, and many of the old baronial mansions have become hotels. The
locals still tell tales of British ghosts. A group of Victorians in bonnets and breeches is
said to appear on the benches on Mall Road; an English gentleman haunts tunnel 103 of
the narrow-gauge railway; a beautiful angrez churail, an English vampiress with
backwards feet and hands, entices Indian men to their doom if they walk at night near
the thick deodar trees at the Boileauganj junction.89 But these imperial nightmares are
fading, replaced by the sense that the once-despised British raj is now just another part
of history, and that the present is all about pushing forward. ‘Gandhi lived in a di erent
world’, a marketing executive from Delhi told a newspaper. ‘If he were alive now, he’d
probably say there was nothing wrong with materialism but you had to get the balance
right.’90 He would not; but even the Mahatma cannot be allowed to stand in the way of
an economic boom.
India today is not Gandhi’s India, though there remains an enormous a ection for
him. There are elements of Gandhi’s India in the nation’s spirituality; elements of
Nehru’s India in its education, culture and technology; elements of Jinnah’s India in the
parts that remain outside; and even elements of the Mountbattens’ India in the
continuing membership of the Commonwealth held by India, Pakistan and Bangladesh.
Though the echoes of 1947 still resonate around Kashmir, and Jinnah’s Pakistans have

taken a very di erent route from the one he might have wanted, the vast and diverse
nation of India has its sights fixed firmly on the future.
