Chapter 1

“I think I was always looking for a kind of personal test, both of myself and of my faith,” George Braswell said in explaining the unusual turn his life took in 1968. “Iran gave me that.”

Originally from a tiny town in the southern reaches of Virginia, Braswell was raised in the progressive wing of the Southern Baptist church, his commitment to civil rights and social justice further honed by graduate studies at the famed Yale Divinity School. By the mid-1960s, however, his youthful restlessness and ambitions had been tempered by practicality, leaving him the pastor of a small North Carolina church while raising a young family. It was there in 1967 that he heard a bit of stirring news: The Foreign Mission Board of the Southern Baptist Convention, the church agency that selected and dispatched evangelical missionaries to the far corners of the globe, was looking for a volunteer to go to Iran.

There had once been a strong tradition of American Protestant missionaries venturing to Iran to start up schools and medical clinics and discreetly convert locals to the Christian faith. By the 1960s, however, that tradition had ended a good half century earlier, and between a rise in Islamic conservatism and lingering Iranian resentment over past Western chauvinism it seemed unlikely to revive anytime soon. Nevertheless, the Southern Baptist leadership had decided it was time to retest the waters. On a lark, the thirty-one-year-old Braswell signed up for the mission, and in early 1968 he and his wife, Joan, and their three young children set off for Iran on a ninety-day visa. “We didn’t know if we’d be able to stay or not,” he recounted, “but the plan was to try to find something to do that the Iranian government would approve of.”

No small order. In light of perpetual tensions between the shah’s modernist regime and Iran’s conservative Muslim clergy, proselytizing was clearly out of the question. When it came to pastoring, both the expatriate population in Tehran and the existing Iranian-Christian communities scattered about the country were well tended. Braswell’s prospects appeared exceedingly dim, but then he was introduced to the dean of Islamic theology at the University of Tehran. Taking a quick liking to the affable Virginian, the dean offered him a position teaching English and comparative religion—Islam excepted—to the school’s graduate students. Braswell immediately accepted, becoming the newest faculty member, and certainly the only American Christian, in one of the leading bastions of Shia Islam higher learning. “There were about thirty-five other members of the faculty,” he recalled, “all of them Muslim clergy and some of them very senior in the religious hierarchy. They all wore turbans and robes. I wore a coat and tie.”

From this improbable vantage point, George Braswell was to become one of the very few outsiders to gain a glimpse of the religious schisms that had developed in Iran by the late 1960s—although gaining that glimpse was a feat in itself. To overcome the legendary Iranian standoffishness with foreigners, Braswell took intensive Farsi-language classes and read whatever he could find on Iranian and Islamic culture. He was also aided by an outgoing personality and an intense curiosity about all aspects of Iranian life. Quite quickly, the Christian evangelist won over even the wariest of his Muslim colleagues. “My whole approach was to be as transparent as I could be,” Braswell explained. “I’d strike up a conversation with anybody and then just let them take it wherever they wanted it to go, and how far they wanted it to go. Once they decided I wasn’t CIA—because to Iranians every American is CIA—they began inviting me into their homes. I sat on the floor, I ate rice with my fingers, I asked questions, and I listened, so I built this trust.”

With that trust, and in response to his unceasing questions about the Islamic faith, Braswell’s Iranian colleagues took to escorting him to various mosques in Tehran during prayer services, something generally discouraged for nonbelievers, so that he could observe the proceedings for himself. At first, these excursions were to the grand old mosques in the city center, but they gradually extended to far more modest structures, often little more than bare cinder-block huts, in the working-class neighborhoods of south and east Tehran.

In his forays into the countryside, Braswell had been instantly struck by the chasm of experience that existed between Iran’s urban and rural, a land where women wore the latest Parisian fashions in central Tehran while, perhaps twenty miles away, farmworkers spent their days harnessed to medieval human-plow contraptions for lack of draft animals. In his trips into the capital’s slums, Braswell saw that this same gulf existed among Tehran’s haves and have-nots, that for every heir of the aristocracy flaunting his wealth in the nightclubs and casinos of downtown were dozens—perhaps hundreds—of itinerant workers crowded into makeshift shacks, young men lured in from the jobless countryside and now scrabbling for whatever subsistence wage was to be found. As Braswell soon discovered, this schism was also reflected in religion, the divide between the so-called government mosques and their traditional counterparts.

In the government mosques, presided over by clerics who were approved and subsidized by the state, Koranic sermons were interlaced with paeans to the shah. In the traditional mosques, by contrast, there was little talk of the king. Instead, the clerics there preached a conservative message of modesty, moral rectitude and a rejection of modern values to congregations largely drawn from the city’s poor or working class. In these mosques, it was not so much what was said that was subversive—all assumed that SAVAK, the shah’s secret police, was everywhere and taking notes—as what was left out: any praise of the regime, any suggestion that the nation was on the correct and righteous path. “So that’s when I realized there was this very large segment of Iranians out there who didn’t like the shah,” Braswell explained, “who thought he was a fraud.”

But the American evangelist’s education was just getting started. So thoroughly did Braswell win the trust of his faculty colleagues and students that one day one of his graduate students approached to ask cryptically if he’d be interested in hearing a special kind of sermon. Braswell readily accepted, even if puzzled by the outing’s arrangements: He was to meet his student at a specific intersection in south Tehran at four in the morning.

He attributed this to the finely honed Iranian streak of paranoia over the shah’s thugs. When he and his family first settled into Tehran, Braswell had been quietly advised that SAVAK had surely tapped his home telephone and that there would be at least one SAVAK plant in all his university classes. He’d also noted a tendency of Iranians to talk in whispers in public settings, a habit he first attributed to a social characteristic until it dawned on him that it was protection against being overheard. Since most Iranians whom Braswell knew displayed such caginess as a matter of course, he didn’t think too much about the precautions his graduate student took that night.

At their rendezvous, the student led Braswell to a nondescript home behind a high mud wall and into a room where about two dozen young seminary students and lower-level clerics, or mullahs, were gathered. Within a few minutes, all fell silent to huddle around a portable tape cassette player as a taped sermon was played. Despite the tinny sound of the machine, the impassioned words of the speaker, delivered in a harsh baritone, came through very clearly. “He was saying, ‘Down with the shah,’ ” Braswell recounted, “ ‘mobilize your forces, get ready to change things.’ ”

All at once, the American professor understood his student’s precautions: He had been led into an underground cell working to overthrow the state, its members subject to imprisonment or worse should they be uncovered by SAVAK. As for the identity of the speaker on the cassette, it was a name Braswell had previously heard only in quick passing: Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini.

Five years earlier, Khomeini, a religious teacher in the city of Qom, had emerged as the chief spokesman of a protest movement against a series of economic and social reforms that the shah was enacting as part of his so-called White Revolution. The most controversial of these was a measure granting Iranian women the right to vote and an agrarian reform program designed to break up the vast landholdings of the kingdom’s oligarch families—and of its many religious foundations—for redistribution to landless peasants. Khomeini had so stridently denounced these initiatives that in June 1963 the shah had him arrested, an action that sparked the bloodiest riots in Iran in a decade. In the face of such popular fury, the shah soon released Khomeini, only to have the conservative cleric quickly launch a new line of attack. This time, the shah bundled his nemesis aboard an airplane and cast him from the country. When George Braswell first heard his sermons in the south Tehran slums, the exiled Khomeini had spent the previous several years in the Shiite holy city of Najaf in neighboring Iraq.

The nighttime excursion with his graduate student convinced Braswell that he was seeing a revolutionary force in the making. “With these cassette tapes he was sending over,” he said, “Khomeini was trying to bring on board the local preachers at mosques all across the country. I got the impression that the local preachers and some of my preacher boys—I called them my preacher boys, the most conservative guys on my faculty—they had a tremendous amount of influence, and Khomeini was developing a coterie of leadership across the country, a network, so that when the auspicious time for revolution came, he would have them prepared.”

Yet Braswell didn’t find any of this particularly alarming. Every society has its malcontents, after all, and so firmly did the shah appear in control of Iran it was hard to imagine a gaggle of Old Guard clerics posed a bona fide threat. Besides, Iran was so important an ally of the United States, and the official American presence there so ubiquitous, that such a movement could hardly have gone unnoticed. “I just assumed I was slow to the game,” Braswell said, “that everyone already knew about this—surely, the CIA and all the guys down at the American embassy knew all about it.”

In this, the evangelist from Virginia could not have been more mistaken. When Braswell first heard Ruhollah Khomeini’s clandestine call to arms in late 1968, the cleric’s name had scarcely garnered a mention anywhere in the voluminous correspondence flowing out of the American embassy or the CIA station in Tehran in the four years since his exile. What’s more, this void would extend for at least eight more years, even as the number of Khomeini cassettes smuggled into Iran multiplied, and both the extent and the intensity of religious opposition to the shah grew. Well into the mid-1970s, in the eyes of American officialdom Ayatollah Khomeini might as well not have existed at all.

It would be unfair, however, to attribute this silence to simple base ignorance. Rather, it was an ignorance born of willfulness, a testament to the culture created by the man around whom all others in Iran tiptoed: the King of Kings.

* * *

Early on the morning of April 6, 1970, a slender fifty-year-old man in a well-tailored suit climbed to the second-floor landing of the Jahan Nama Palace in Tehran. His name was Asadollah Alam, and his official title was minister of the imperial court of Iran.

At the top of the landing, he was met by two liveried footmen who ceremoniously swung open an ivory-inlaid door. The room Alam stepped into was spacious and, if the morning curtains had already been drawn back from its exterior windows, almost dazzlingly bright: all stained glass and chandeliers and mosaics of mirrored silver. At the center of this glittery place was a long desk, behind which sat another fifty-year-old man, also slender and also clad in a business suit. This was Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, the shahanshah.

In all likelihood, that morning’s meeting of the two men followed the same general pattern as the hundreds that had preceded it. The shah had probably been reading from one of the stacks of papers on his desk with his oversized, black-rimmed bifocals when Alam entered. It’s just as probable that he neither spoke nor looked up as his minister approached, but instead absently raised his right hand from the desk to let it hover in the air. Drawing up at the shah’s side, Alam would have executed a deep bow, then taken the proffered hand and, while kissing it, whispered a prayer for the continued health and safety of the man known as the King of Kings, Light of the Aryans, Shadow of God on Earth. This incantation complete, Alam would have then rounded the desk, careful not to show his back to the monarch while doing so, to stand on its opposite side. Because their meeting that April morning was scheduled to be brief, perhaps a mere twenty minutes, the court minister probably remained standing for the duration.

In itself, this bit of royal theater would not have seemed at all odd to anyone familiar with the rhythms of the Iranian imperial court in the spring of 1970; with only slight variation, it was the same ritual performed by every Iranian commoner who gained admission to the shah’s inner sanctum. It might seem a bit more peculiar if one considered that, by then, the king had long since regarded Asadollah Alam as the closest friend and confidant he had ever known.

The two men had first crossed paths in Tehran in the late 1930s. It was an inevitable encounter since Alam, from an aristocratic family of eastern Iran, and Crown Prince Mohammad Reza traveled in the capital city’s small circle of ruling elite, but it wasn’t until the late 1940s, after the shah had ascended the throne and set out to amass greater power, that the two firmly joined forces. For Alam, the attraction seemed born less of self-aggrandizement than a shared vision for their nation’s future. By then, the callow young king already dreamed of wresting Iran into the modern era, and to do so required breaking the iron grip of a clergy and landed aristocracy that had kept Iran in a feudalistic state for centuries. Despite his own highly privileged background—the Alam family literally “owned” scores of villages in Birjand province—Asadollah shared in this goal, as well as in the shah’s contempt for the nation’s calcified political class. As the shah’s stock steadily rose, so did Alam’s, especially after he stayed loyal to the monarch during a 1953 constitutional crisis when many others jumped ship. That crisis had ended with a coup restoring the shah to absolute power. With Alam’s most favored status thus secured, over the next decade the king rotated him through a series of ministerial positions, culminating in his assuming the prime ministership in 1962. That appointment notwithstanding, there was no clearer measure of where true power lay in Iran—as well as of how greatly the shah had come to rely on the aristocrat from Birjand—than the fact that Alam became minister of the imperial court after serving as prime minister.

Many of those who had dealings with the Iranian royal court in its last years would comment on a pronounced physical similarity between the shah and Asadollah Alam. Both had slender frames and stayed physically fit, and both were self-conscious about their relatively slight height, which they compensated for with elevator shoes and ramrod-straight posture. More than physical appearance, though, this impression of sameness was reinforced by a matching of mannerisms, of body language and gesture—only to be expected, perhaps, of two people so constantly in each other’s company. In addition to their almost-daily meetings, which could last anywhere from fifteen minutes to five or six hours, the minister of court accompanied the shah on almost all his trips away from the palace, whether one-day excursions to the Iranian countryside or extended state visits to foreign capitals. His presence was even demanded on royal vacations; as Alam once noted in his diary as the shah prepared to leave for a skiing holiday to Switzerland, “HIM [His Imperial Majesty] stressed that he will be unescorted for much of his coming trip to Europe and expects me to keep him company as often as possible.” Over the span of his nearly four decades on the Peacock Throne, the shah surely spent more of his waking hours in the company of Asadollah Alam than anyone else.

On the morning of April 6, 1970, the main item on their agenda was to go over preparations for a grand party, scheduled to take place in eighteen months, at the ancient Persian capital of Persepolis. It was a celebration very long in the works. The shah had always felt aggrieved by the manner in which he had assumed the throne in 1941, a slapdash affair utterly devoid of pageantry, and for just as long had nursed the hope of holding some kind of do-over event. Outsiders might be forgiven for thinking he’d achieved that with a second coronation ceremony in 1967, but despite a glittering show of horse-drawn carriages and bejeweled crowns and thirty-foot silken trains, the notable lack of high-ranking foreign dignitaries in attendance at that event—there seemed to be a collective mystification in foreign capitals as to why a coronation was occurring twenty-six years after the fact—continued to rankle. For the upcoming spectacle at Persepolis, the shah was promoting a far more memorable milestone, twenty-five hundred years of imperial Persian rule, and planning a multiday extravaganza of parades and fireworks and feasts the likes of which the world had rarely seen. This, to the shah’s mind, was just as it should be, since the world had rarely seen a success story like modern Iran, a land risen from the shackles of foreign domination and now poised to restore its ancient splendor and reclaim its place among the first rank of nations.

There was a snag, though. Persepolis lay at the very edge of the barren, waterless deserts of central Iran, thirty miles from the nearest sizable town and three hundred miles from the nearest decent hotel. Just where to put all the foreign dignitaries the shah hoped would attend? In addition, by some nasty quirk of nature, the Persepolis environs were home to a staggering array of venomous snakes, scorpions and poisonous reptiles. How to ensure the festivities wouldn’t be marred by the unhappy spectacle of a visiting head of state or lady-in-waiting collapsing into convulsive death throes? As with so many other problems that came Iran’s way, the shah had assigned the task of finding solutions to the minister of the imperial court.

On that April morning, Alam had a bit of dispiriting news to impart about the party preparations, but after thirty years’ association with the king, he knew it best to start on a more upbeat note. He could now report that the extension to the airport runway in Shiraz, necessary to accommodate the Boeing 707s that would bring dignitaries to the festival site, was about to get under way. Once arrived at the gleaming new terminal, VIPs would be whisked across the desert in one of the 250 Mercedes sedans on special order for the occasion. By far the most ambitious aspect of the enterprise was the tent city to be built beside the Persepolis ruins once its plague of deadly reptiles had been eradicated. Serving as temporary homes to the most important invitees, some sixty prefabricated buildings were to be arrayed over the desert in a sunburst pattern and adjacent to a massive banquet hall where the international elite would gorge upon caviar-stuffed quail eggs and roasted peacock. That was the original plan anyway, but it was now Alam’s sad duty to inform the shah that even eighteen months out the cost overruns for the party were soaring. In particular, the estimate for the main banquet hall, contracted to the finest tentmakers in Europe, was staggering. At that day’s meeting, Alam persuaded the shah to reduce the banquet pavilion to a quarter of its originally proposed size, producing a savings of millions, but not, as he noted in his diary that evening, “without a considerable struggle.”

From there, their conversation moved on to other things, the plethora of issues, large and small, that forever framed the days of the two most powerful men in Iran.

Because the shah personally oversaw so much of the workings of the nation, because he allowed—in fact, insisted—that the demands on his time and attention range from the gravest issues of state to the almost absurdly trivial, the same relentless cascade of matters befell his closest aide. As a consequence, at the same time that Alam was seeing to the trimming of the Persepolis banquet hall tent, he was also working to expand Iran’s sphere of military influence in the Persian Gulf, serving as the point man in a series of extremely complex oil-for-arms deals with the United States and Great Britain and, in his spare time, trying to come up with a workable scheme to assassinate the rogue former head of the shah’s secret police.

And these were just the higher end of Alam’s responsibilities and concerns. The minister was also constantly enlisted to play peacemaker among the extended Pahlavi royal family—and a most quarrelsome family it was.

In the spring of 1970, the shah was feuding with his eldest daughter from his first marriage, Shahnaz. Building from a series of recent scandals involving her circle of dissolute jet-set friends, the twenty-nine-year-old divorcée now wished to marry the wastrel hippie son of an Iranian general; adopting the role of trusted uncle, Alam mediated between father and daughter while also taking the would-be groom aside to demand he give up his “hippiefied nonsense.” The previous summer, the shah’s twin sister, Ashraf, had accused her brother of neglect and left Iran in a huff, and it had been Alam, masquerading as the shah, who penned the letter begging for her forgiveness and return. By that April, Ashraf, the woman dubbed the Black Panther for her palace intrigues and propensity for siphoning funds from government development projects, was trading on the rapprochement with her brother to pursue her most audacious goal yet: to be elected the next United Nations secretary-general. “She’s getting crazier and crazier,” the shah vented to Alam about Ashraf’s UN campaign. “It’s the menopause that’s doing it.” Then there were the king’s frequent spats with the queen mother. Mother and son had an odd relationship, one simultaneously close and reproachful, and the shah seemed to take quiet delight in teasing the seventy-four-year-old lady until she lost her temper, only to then dispatch his minister of court to calm her down.

Where all these family tensions tended to reach full boil were at the regular dinners of the extended royal family. These occurred two or three times a week, usually at the queen mother’s home in the old Saadabad palace complex, about two miles from the shah’s own new royal residence at Niavaran. These were uniformly dreary affairs, attended by whichever of the shah’s relations—siblings, cousins, nieces or nephews—happened to be in town or could be bothered to make their way over from their own residences in the Saadabad compound, and try as he might to escape, Alam was frequently strong-armed into attending by the shah himself.

And there was at least one more frequent demand the monarch placed on Alam’s time, one rooted in a proclivity they shared. Both men were inveterate lotharios, with the same fondness for tall and statuesque women, especially Europeans and especially blondes. With Alam obviously able to operate with more stealth than the king, it was he who frequently saw to the recruitment of willing women for both of them—highly coveted were airline stewardesses, along with European starlets and high-end prostitutes—and their transport to discreet love nests around Tehran. So frequent were these trysts, or “outings” as the shah euphemistically called them, that the risk of detection by their respective wives was nearly constant. Certainly the shah’s third wife, Farah Diba, was well aware of her husband’s rapacious appetites, and her suspicions of Alam’s role in satisfying them were a source of periodic friction between them. As Alam noted in his diary during one extended stretch of coolness on the queen’s part, “HMQ [Her Majesty the Queen] believes that her husband and I go philandering together, and in that she’s not far wide of the truth.”

Yet, for all the time and intimacies the two men shared, theirs was certainly not a friendship in the generally recognized sense of the word, not a relationship of mutual respect and concern. Instead, and as evidenced by their morning hand-kissing ritual, it more closely resembled the interplay between faithful servant and eighteenth-century master. On one occasion, when Alam returned to the palace after a lengthy illness, he was initially moved when the shah rose and came around his desk “to offer me his hand which I kissed with real sincerity.” The minister initially interpreted this break with formality as a sign of genuine friendship—the shah had truly missed him—only to have the king then berate him for having convalesced for longer than expected. Particularly wounding had been an episode in May 1969 when Alam rashly urged a bit of advice on the shah too forcefully. It prompted an angry king to acidly remind Alam that he was “only” the court minister and therefore hardly qualified to comment on the matter. “I am ready to sacrifice anything on his behalf,” Alam lamented in his diary that night, “yet he feels obliged to offer all of us these cutting reminders of who is boss.”

On one level, such put-downs simply came with the territory, part of the governing style of a ruler ever fearful that his subordinates might outshine or conspire against him. Naturally, those closest to the apex of power came in for special monitoring and mistreatment. As a result, if Alam became too closely associated with some popular government initiative, he was apt to see it abruptly transferred to someone else. If at an airport welcoming ceremony a visiting head of state seemed overly pleased to renew Alam’s acquaintance, the court minister might suddenly find himself disinvited from all subsequent meetings. The king’s attention to such matters could descend to the remarkably petty. One of Alam’s few respites from the burdens of office was to go horseback riding in the foothills above Tehran, a hobby that in the late 1960s he shared with the British ambassador, Denis Wright. The two had a standing arrangement to ride together every Friday morning, but so consistently did the shah summon Alam back to the palace as soon as they arrived at the royal stables that Wright finally concluded the disruptions were deliberate. For those given the honor of serving the King of Kings at close quarters, the price was unceasing demands and routine humiliations.

Yet in comparison to others in the imperial inner circle, there seemed a special strain of tension in the shah’s treatment of Asadollah Alam, the clear respect for his counsel accompanied by a heightened need to denigrate. What made this more curious was that in contrast to some of the king’s other advisors over the years, the court minister had never displayed the slightest sign of playing usurper to the throne, nor cultivated the sort of independent power base that might enable him to do so. To the contrary, even in the presumed anonymity of private letters, Alam was in the habit of referring to the shah as “my mighty leader.”

Instead, it seems likely this strain had root in a history-altering secret the two men shared.

Over the course of his reign, Shah Pahlavi had twice been pushed to the edge of ruin, buffeted by threats so grave they threatened to sweep him from power. The first was the 1953 constitutional crisis that culminated in a military coup, and the second was the shah’s showdown with the religious firebrand Ayatollah Khomeini in 1963. Both times Asadollah Alam had stood resolutely beside the shah, but he had played a far more significant role in the second crisis than all but a tiny handful of palace insiders were aware.

When the shah announced the first tranche of his White Revolution reforms in early 1963, Alam was serving as his prime minister; indeed, while both men made scant mention of it in subsequent years, it’s probable that the more liberal-minded Alam was a prime mover behind the initiative. Almost instantly, the shah’s more modernist proposals came under attack by Iran’s clerical archconservatives, and none more vituperative than Ruhollah Khomeini. Through the spring of 1963, Khomeini steadily escalated his attacks on the regime, with matters threatening to reach a violent climax on Ashura, or the day of atonement, the most emotionally charged high point of the Shia religious calendar. On the eve of Ashura, with Khomeini rumored to be preparing a particularly strident sermon for the following day, an anxious shah put a call through to Prime Minister Alam. “What shall we do?” he asked.

“If you want to get tough, get tough,” Alam replied. “But if you take half measures, you will lose everything.”

“But what shall we do?” the shah plaintively asked again.

Alam certainly knew Mohammad Reza Pahlavi well enough by then to grasp the meaning of this passive tone: As had happened at other key junctures in his reign, the king was stepping back, leaving it to others to act. “Don’t worry,” Alam said before hanging up, “I’ll manage it.”

In his public address on Ashura, Khomeini not only denounced the shah’s regime as illegitimate but heaped abuse on him as a tool of his Western and Israeli allies with a vitriol never previously uttered aloud in Iran. “You miserable wretch,” he thundered from his lectern in Qom, “forty-five years of your life have passed; isn’t it time for you to think and reflect a little, to ponder about where all this is leading you?”

A line had been crossed. Alam ordered Khomeini’s arrest, and very early on the morning of June 5 a squadron of policemen closed on the ayatollah’s home to haul him off to jail. The backlash was immediate. In cities throughout Iran, enraged crowds of the faithful took to the streets to denounce the shah and demand Khomeini’s release, while in Tehran seemingly organized bands of protesters made for specific government buildings in the capital—ministry headquarters, police stations—to ransack and set them on fire. With the shah cloistered in his palace, it was Asadollah Alam who acted, calling the heads of the nation’s security services into his office to announce he was declaring martial law.

According to a participant at that meeting, an awkward silence followed Alam’s announcement, finally broken by one of the security chiefs suggesting that only the King of Kings had the authority to issue such an order. At this, Alam grabbed up his office telephone and called the monarch, holding out the receiver so that the others in the room could hear their exchange. Informing the shah that the situation was spiraling out of control, Alam said, “I have the commanders of the security forces here, and believe you should command them to stop the riots by whatever means necessary.”

The shah sounded taken aback. “You mean open fire?”

“That is the only way,” Alam replied.

According to the eyewitness, the shah continued to balk even as Alam insisted there was no other option. At last, he relented: “Mr. Prime Minister, if that is your judgment, and you are prepared to take the consequences of your judgment, you may proceed.”

With that, Alam hung up the telephone, turned to the security commanders and ordered them to “clear the streets.” They did so with alacrity. Beginning that evening, detachments of soldiers and police threw up barricades across the paths of protesters in half a dozen cities and fired into their midst when they failed to disperse. By the time order was restored, at least a hundred Iranians had been killed, according to government sources—in the years ahead, Khomeini and his supporters would claim as many as fifteen thousand dead—but the violent crackdown had its desired effect: Across the nation, the fever of insurrection seemed to dissipate as quickly as it had begun. By the following year, when a still-recalcitrant Khomeini was hustled off to a foreign exile, protests by his supporters were sporadic and halfhearted, paling in comparison to those of June 1963. It was a formative moment in the history of modern Iran. The King of Kings had faced down his most virulent opponent and won, and only a handful of palace insiders knew the true story: that until the last moment the shah had quailed, that it had actually been Asadollah Alam who carried the day. By the spring of 1970, the two men had carried their “guilty secret” for seven years, and while surely never spoken of, it just as surely injected a certain frisson of tension into their relationship.

Judging by the diary he scrupulously kept, it’s also clear that by April 1970 the court minister was frequently recalling the past crises he and the shah had faced. That is because Alam was increasingly convinced that the nation—and more specifically the shah’s grip on the nation—was tumbling toward another time of trial. Nothing so dramatic as the showdown with Khomeini, perhaps; instead, the perils Alam saw in 1970 were more diffuse, a kind of slow unspooling. Distilled to a single word: “malaise.”

In truth, this wasn’t an altogether new concern, but for a long time the minister of court had attributed it to the same set of ills that had always plagued his homeland: an entrenched ruling class that controlled the kingdom’s economic lifeblood, an archconservative religious hierarchy resistant to all change. Joined to this, a culture of corruption, an elaborate system of payoffs and sinecures and favor trading that went back centuries and extended from the local traffic policeman all the way up to the top reaches of government ministries. Of course, it was to end all this that the shah had launched his White Revolution in 1963, but as that decade drew to a close, Asadollah Alam had begun to grasp how little had truly changed in Iran.

In the summer of 1969, he attended a parliamentary reception to celebrate the anniversary of Constitution Day, but as he confided in his diary, the event felt “more like a wake than a birthday party. It brought home to me that I belong to a corrupt and money-grubbing elite. Iran stands little chance under the thumb of such a motley crew.” A short time later, a traffic accident had stranded his chauffeur-driven limousine in one of the new slums sprouting up on the outskirts of Tehran, giving Alam “a glimpse of the life that goes on in that squalid district.” That glimpse was of a policeman lording his power over the others, “puffed up like the monarch of all he surveyed,” of “pariah dogs and a few unwashed babies pawing over a heap of rubbish at the streetcorner,” of “shaven-headed servicemen wearing badly-cut trousers, ill-fitting boots.” It was, he wrote in his diary, “both droll and desperately depressing, a scene from a top-heavy society.” The heretical thought occurred to him that at least in the Soviet Union there was an element of social equality, that almost everyone was poor together, rather than the chasm between rich and poor that one saw in Iran. “The shah struggles day and night, confident that within a decade we shall have surpassed much of the developed world,” he wrote after his morning in the slums. “Yet no manner of wishful thinking can alter life in those streets.”

But how to change that, to foster true transformation? The only way, to Alam’s thinking, was to give the people a tangible stake in the political system. His growing conviction on this point had led him to first raise the issue with the shah during one of their palace meetings in late 1969, in the same month he’d been stranded in his Chrysler Imperial in the Tehran slums.

At that meeting, Alam had urged the king to hold elections, “real and meaningful elections,” at every level of the government, from village councils to parliament to provincial governorships, arguing that it was only with such direct involvement that people would feel they were being heard. Needless to say, such elections wouldn’t impinge on the monarchy—the shah’s position would remain inviolate—but democratic reforms along these lines, Alam contended, would lead to both a more contented population and a more efficient government. “We must seize this opportunity,” he implored, “allow the people a role.”

The shah was intrigued by the idea, so much so that he had repeated Alam’s proposal almost verbatim in a meeting with parliamentary officials the following day. But then, nothing. As with so many other matters that arose at the royal palace, the idea of a democratic opening was a source of discussion for a few days, with ministers mumbling about the need for further study, perhaps the writing of some reports, and then allowed to wither away.

In the months since that talk, though, the court minister had begun to see things a bit differently. He still believed the shah was the only person who could fix Iran’s ills, but by that April morning when he walked into the shah’s inner sanctum to discuss the Persepolis banquet hall, he was also now coming to see him as part of the problem. He didn’t mean this in any treasonous way—Alam certainly wasn’t advocating the overthrow of his “mighty leader”—but rather that part of the reason issues were allowed to fester and dangers to build was the monarch’s growing distance from the people.

Even the shah’s bitterest enemies recognized he was a workaholic, often toiling in his office for twelve or fourteen hours a day, but it begged the question of just what, other than the papers set on his desk, he actually saw. Beyond the high walls and numerous guard posts of the royal compound of Niavaran was a city that by 1970 had grown an astounding sevenfold since the shah had assumed the throne and was now a sprawling and unplanned tangle of three and a half million inhabitants whom he could hardly recognize. With the city expanding at the rate of fifteen thousand new residents per month, this was becoming truer all the time, and so horrendous was Tehran’s traffic that the shah now held almost all his meetings within the Niavaran enclave, with days, even weeks, going by when he ventured no farther than the few hundred feet between his home and his office. On those occasions when he did leave his leafy preserve for the city proper, it was almost always by helicopter.

But the shah’s remove also found reflection in the formal parlor where he and Alam usually met. That began with the room’s almost eerie symmetry. At its center stood the king’s desk, at either end of which matching end tables held matching lamps beneath matching chandeliers. Set precisely the same distance away from the end tables, two identical armchair and coffee table arrangements were placed atop identical Persian carpets, which in turn were situated in perfect alignment with two French doors, two ornate porcelain urns and two lacquered armoires. A visitor standing at the middle of that room would have been hard-pressed to find an item on its left side that didn’t have its match on the right.

If this symmetry spoke to a person who craved order and system, a couple of other features of the room offered clues to how this was put into practice. The royal desk was really more akin to a table, with none of a desk’s deep drawers or side cabinets for the storing of papers. That’s because papers didn’t linger in the office. Instead, they were carried in by palace functionaries at the king’s request, to be read or signed and then whisked out again. Also revealing was the absence of any chair beside that desk other than the shah’s own, no place for an advisor or government minister to sit alongside while he and the monarch conferred. That’s because such conferences rarely occurred. While the shah and Alam might repair to one of the room’s armchair and coffee table setups if their talks became lengthy, almost any other Iranian who entered the sanctuary, from lowly palace minion to senior minister, remained standing before the king for the duration of their visit, ever vigilant for the sharp nod or flick of the royal hand that indicated their audience was over. To a man enamored of routine, who issued literally thousands of directives every week, this assembly-line approach to governance must have been highly pleasing: Papers were brought, signed and taken away; humble men hurried in, explained themselves and hurried out again.

But to Alam’s mind, these displays underscored a deepening dysfunction within the palace. In keeping with his fear of potential conspirators, the shah had developed the habit of meeting with his ministers and senior officials individually, only rarely in a group. In this way, each official ushered into the Jahan Nama sanctum was given his own set of instructions and each ministry its own mandate, often without any consultation between them or with the prime minister, who, if not bestowed with any real power, was at least meant to act as a coordinator of the shah’s wishes. With no branch of government fully grasping what any other was doing, the result was massive duplication, staggering cost overruns, even at times government programs working at direct cross-purposes with others. Joined to this was the king’s innate distrust of any minister who displayed excessive intelligence; as a biographer astutely noted, these men were chosen “not for their ability but for their limitations.”

Along with profound inefficiency, this divide-and-rule approach inevitably fueled ferocious competition, with every minister and palace functionary vying to gain the king’s favor. And how best to gain favor with a ruler both fearful of rivals and averse to hearing bad news? By besmirching the work of one’s colleagues and by telling that ruler exactly what he wished to hear. Indeed, the scramble to avoid being the bearer of bad news sometimes led to a perverse form of alliance among court competitors, a mutual protection pact to simply withhold unpleasant details from the king altogether. In fact, this finely crafted system of deflection had very nearly led to disaster just weeks before Alam’s April 6 meeting with the shah.

In late February 1970, the shah had been on a ski vacation in Switzerland when the Tehran municipal government abruptly decided to triple bus fares. Amid a great public outcry—university students boycotted classes, and rioters destroyed several buses—the prime minister held an emergency meeting of the cabinet. In light of the turmoil, nearly all cabinet members urged that the fare increase be rescinded, but the prime minister, not wanting to look like an appeaser, chose to withhold this consensus opinion from the shah. In this information vacuum, the king was initially swayed by the contrary advice of his generals to call out the troops, an outcome averted only by a frantic phone call to St. Moritz from Alam. “Remember, I was prime minister the last time we used force to quell a riot,” he told the shah, referring to the June 1963 protests, “but the present situation is very different. For goodness sake, tell the government to refrain from using force.” Heeding this advice, the shah quickly ordered the fare increase to be canceled, ending the tempest, but to Alam’s way of thinking the crisis should never have occurred in the first place. But how to prevent a reprise in the future? And if the people were ready to take to the streets over bus fares, what greater flash points lurked out there that the government didn’t even know about?

Most crucially of all, how to get the King of Kings to pay attention to such dangers? By the spring of 1970, virtually every Iranian who came into contact with the shah bowed down to him, both literally and figuratively. They raptly listened to his every utterance, agreed with his every judgment, obeyed his every command. In the process, the monarch was coming to inhabit a make-believe world of his own construction. In this world, all the Iranian people were enjoying the fruits of progress as never before, the annual growth rate was an astounding 22 percent, and Iran’s international standing and military prowess were propelling it into the first rank of nations at a speed never equaled in human history. Shortly after the bus fare contretemps, Alam had urged the shah to stop relying on his Greek chorus of ministers and palace hangers-on and to appoint actual experts to study the nation’s problems and propose real solutions. “He’ll have none of it,” Alam wrote in his diary that night. “One day, I fear we may pay for this neglect.” Even if he didn’t dare voice it aloud, what he most feared was a tumbling into another situation like 1963, another crisis where a stunned and lost king would ask, “But what shall we do?”

Yet amid these deepening worries, Alam saw at least one great reason for hope. It stemmed from a curious contradiction in the shah.

For all his imperiousness, Mohammad Reza Pahlavi secretly scorned the excessive groveling of those who came before him almost as much as he delighted in it, distrusted the dulcet words of his flatterers even as he demanded to hear them. In 1970, Iran’s foreign minister was in the habit of going one better than the hand-kissing ritual upon meeting the shah, instead prostrating himself on the office carpet in order to kiss his shoes, but rather than be impressed by this, the shah frequently ridiculed the man to Alam. More important, this impulse toward modesty, heavily veiled though it was, often caused the king to place greater trust in those who didn’t always supplicate, who had the temerity to occasionally disagree or stand up to him. There was no better proof of this impulse than Asadollah Alam himself, of course, still a presence at the palace when so many others had been cast off over the years.

But how to make sure the shah listened when it truly mattered, that, as in the case of the bus fare protests, Alam’s preempting phone call got through in time? And if not him, who else was out there whose judgment the king respected, whose words of warning might rise above those of the fawning chorus? In the spring of 1970, there was really just one other person in the shah’s inner circle who fit this bill: It was his thirty-one-year-old third wife, Farah Diba Pahlavi.

As might be expected in a memoir titled An Enduring Love, Farah Pahlavi in exile places a rather high gloss on her relationship with her now-deceased husband. In the book, the shah is portrayed as endlessly solicitous of her opinion on all manner of topics, and there is scant mention of any serious disagreements between them. The reality was quite different, as a number of palace intimates, including Asadollah Alam, could attest. While the king tolerated the queen’s displays of modernity and independence, she was liable to come in for a severe tongue-lashing if she aired her disagreements with him too publicly or forcefully.

Yet despite their squabbles, it’s clear the shah greatly valued his wife’s political acumen, and that just as he begrudgingly respected Alam for his candor, so the same held true for her. It was no coincidence that in selecting those who should oversee the planning of the 1971 Persepolis celebration, certainly the most ambitious and important public relations effort of his entire reign, the monarch turned to these same two “dissidents” in his immediate circle.

But if Alam and the queen were kindred spirits of sorts—each was alarmed by the culture of sycophancy taking hold in the palace and admired the willingness of the other to stand against it—their relationship was a complicated one. On the one hand, there was Alam’s role as sexual procurer for the shah, for which he was made acutely aware of Her Majesty’s icy displeasure. For his part, Alam didn’t much trust in either the queen’s judgment or her maturity, as was evident amid recent talk of naming her crown regent, the royal stand-in should the shah die before his heir, the crown prince, came of age. The court minister had been fiercely opposed. “HMQ is an angel of purity but she is inexperienced and rather impulsive,” Alam wrote at the time, before condescendingly comparing her to her eight-year-old son. “Like the Crown Prince she is simply too young to assume power.”

Yet as 1970 progressed and his apprehensions about the future grew, Alam seemed to increasingly regard the queen as his most important potential ally—perhaps his only such ally—in trying to pierce the remoteness and inertia of the palace. It was a recognition that set the stage for a remarkable conversation between the two. It took place on May 9, just one month after Alam’s meeting with the shah about the Persepolis banquet hall, when he accompanied the queen on a day trip to the holy city of Mashhad in northeastern Iran.

Over the course of that day, the court minister stood alongside Queen Farah as she saw to a grueling round of public receptions. In contrast to her husband, the shahbanou had a pronounced “common touch,” a warmth and charisma that were infectious, and the crowds in Mashhad that day were joyous, straining and pushing to get closer to her. The highlight of the trip was a visit to a leprosy hospital, an experience that brought the emotional queen to tears and moved Alam to try to comfort her.

A different interplay took place between them during that evening’s flight back to Tehran. Perhaps due to exhaustion at the end of that very long day, the queen derided the government’s myriad public relations campaigns as hackneyed and laughable. On top of this was the parade of government initiatives, so often announced and loudly promoted but really meant only for show. Such cynical exercises, she pointed out, only shook the people’s faith in the regime that much more. Her concerns neatly mirrored many of those Alam had been quietly harboring, and his relief at finding a confederate was evident in his diary entry that night: “Her Majesty, like the mass of the Iranian people, has good cause to be worried.”

It had been six months since Alam first pressed the shah to enact democratic reforms, only to see the idea wither, but emboldened by the shahbanou’s concurrence, he resolved to raise the matter again. He did so on May 13, just four days after that trip to Mashhad. In a touch of cleverness—or cowardice, depending on one’s perspective—he thought to couch his new effort as originating with the queen. The stratagem didn’t work. “It’s beyond the bounds of possibility to act on every suggestion she makes,” the shah said of his wife after Alam made his pitch. “She’s well-intentioned, but no one could honestly credit her with much experience or patience.”

But whether born of the same unease that had stalked him for months or encouraged to discover his worries were shared by the one person even closer to the shah, Alam tried again a few weeks later. The setting was another of his morning meetings with the king, and he broached his idea in the form of a novel proposition. “From time to time,” he suggested, “why don’t you summon representatives from all walks of life, ordinary people, off the streets, and question them about their cares and concerns? I’m sure you’d obtain a fascinating response.”

The shah dismissed the idea. “But I already know what the people think,” he replied. “I’m fed report after report from goodness knows how many sources.”

But on that day, Alam was ready to push the point much further than he ever had before. Far from a reliable gauge of public opinion, he told the shah, those reports were part of the problem, composed by underlings with an eye toward generating exactly what they thought the king wanted to hear. As Alam recounted, this rejoinder “went down very badly,” but still he pressed on. Over the course of their meeting that day, he repeatedly argued that it was time for a change in how the nation was governed, and to start with, the shah needed to stop listening to his flatterers and find new ways to hear the voices of his people. It was a brash overture, one that only Alam was capable of delivering so strongly, but by the end he felt it had worked. “He greeted these remarks in silence,” he wrote of the shah that night, “but all the same I got the impression that their sincerity had hit home. Within the next few days I’m confident that he’ll issue instructions to get things moving along the lines I suggest.”

The minister of the imperial court was soon proven wrong once again. Just as with his early advocacy of free elections, so his new proposals to politically engage the people were bandied about the palace for a few days before floating off into the ether. Alam received an indication of this a short time later when he tried to give the shah yet another warning about the tenuousness of power, of how quickly a nation can turn against its ruler. In this, the court minister was clearly remembering both the 1953 coup, what a close-run thing it had been, and the upheavals of 1963, the shah’s paralysis as the wrathful mobs roamed the streets. But the king was no longer listening. “The Iranian people now love me,” he said, “and will never forsake me.” In the face of such obstinacy, Asadollah Alam could only hope that one day his warnings took hold—perhaps in conjunction with those of his new tentative ally, Farah Diba Pahlavi.

But in the meantime, for both court minister and empress, there was a party to plan.

Chapter 2

While accompanying Queen Farah on a tour of a village in the Iranian countryside, a functionary noted that a number of its roads had recently been paved in anticipation of her visit. If meant to flatter, the remark backfired. In that case, Pahlavi archly responded, perhaps she should develop the habit of visiting several villages and city suburbs every day.

Today, the former empress of Iran divides her time between an apartment in Paris and a modern home in a quiet subdivision outside Washington, D.C. While large by the standards of most countries, the house in the Maryland suburbs is quite modest when compared with the gargantuan nouveau riche mansions that predominate in the area, and whereas Pahlavi could once rely on a royal household staff numbering in the hundreds, her entourage has now dwindled to a single elderly housekeeper and a valet. Even the private bodyguards who once shadowed her every step are gone, a concession both to allegedly dwindling finances and to the belief that more than four decades removed from the Islamic revolution that swept her husband from power, the zealots who once vowed to track down and kill her and her children either have lost interest or are deceased themselves.

The expansive foyer and living room of the home have a feel somewhere between that of an art gallery and a busy framing shop. Almost every flat surface is crowded by an array of framed photographs of one or another of Pahlavi’s four children or her late husband, while almost every wall has been given over to large canvases of modern artwork. Many of these, too, are portraits of members of the former royal family and tend toward the impressionistic or avant-garde. Given prominence of place at one end of the living room is a bronze bust of the King of Kings.

If not quite the “commoner” palace biographers and society magazines liked to portray, Farah Diba came from a prominent and once-affluent family fallen on hard times. She was just a young girl when, following the death of her military officer father, she and her mother were forced to leave the ancestral family home for a small Tehran apartment shared with relatives. Both extraordinarily bright and ambitious, after graduating first in her class from a women’s college in Tehran, Pahlavi won admission to the prestigious École Spéciale d’Architecture in Paris. It was there where she met the visiting shah in 1959. Before the year was out, the twice-divorced king had given up his playboy ways—at least publicly—and married Diba, then just twenty-one. In storybook fashion, the following year she gave birth to the first of their four children, a boy named Reza, and Iran now had a crown prince.

From early on, both the Iranian people and the shah understood that their young queen would be very different from her predecessors. Championing women’s rights, Pahlavi made a point of presiding over graduation ceremonies at girls’ schools and colleges, always unveiled, and made sure newspaper photographers were present when she voted in municipal elections, toured construction projects or engaged in other traditionally “manly” enterprises. This all seemed to mesh very well with her husband’s own progressive ideas. At his 1967 coronation ceremony, the king bestowed on his wife the title of shahbanou, or empress, a designation that had never previously existed. Three years later, when his plans for a grand celebration at Persepolis were falling far behind schedule, he insisted she take charge.

Still extremely vibrant and personable, the eighty-six-year-old Pahlavi seems determined to maintain a certain formal bearing despite the onset of some physical frailties. For a meeting at her home, she wore makeup, a fashionable pantsuit and, rather to the consternation of her valet, shoes with three-inch heels. Known for her championing of the arts—along with launching an annual art and music festival that was groundbreaking for its day, the queen oversaw the building of museums and cultural centers throughout Iran—she was most animated with a visitor when showing off an oversized folio of photographs of her with famous artists. “Dalí, Chagall, Warhol, I knew them all,” she said with a light, incredulous laugh, as if still not believing her good luck. She lingered on a page that carried a reproduction of the portrait Andy Warhol made of her. The painting was rendered in the same style as his famous Marilyn Monroe silk screens and had once hung in the modern art museum in Tehran. “The Islamists destroyed it when they took over.” The former queen gave a dry, mirthless chuckle. “The fools; they could’ve sold it for millions.”

After more than forty years of being both a widow and an exile, Farah Pahlavi has a somewhat practiced manner in the way she talks about her tumultuous life. There are also clearly details she would rather not discuss at length. One is the fact that in addition to her husband she has already outlived two of her four children, losing her youngest son and daughter to suicide. “I’ve had a very hard but beautiful life,” she said when the subject of her deceased children arose, and implicit in her tone was that she really didn’t wish to talk about it further. As in her memoir, An Enduring Love, she tends to speak of her late husband in reverential terms, often referring to him as “His Majesty,” as she did in public when she was empress of Iran.

One topic that endures as a sore point is the 1971 party at Persepolis. Little wonder. In its aftermath, that extravaganza became a kind of rallying cry for the shah’s opponents, a shabby display of gaudy excess in the view of one set of detractors, an affront to the eyes of God in the view of another. Amid the firestorm of criticism, the queen, publicly identified as one of the festival’s chief architects, came in for special opprobrium.

The idea of a Persepolis-style celebration had been kicking around the Iranian royal palace for years but gained new currency in the late 1960s. In the peculiar way these sorts of things often developed at the imperial court, this chatter eventually led to the forming of a planning committee and then, quite suddenly, to the announcement of a festival date: October 1971. That was as far as the planning went, however. When Asadollah Alam was brought on board in 1970, he found virtually nothing had been done other than the issuance of invitations to heads of state around the world. With that act making it impossible to cancel or delay the festival, the court minister then dashed off to Europe and signed a series of rush contracts with some of the Continent’s toniest brands to provide everything from prefabricated homes to china teacups and flower arrangements. An indication of the strain on Alam was suggested by the admonishment he imparted to planning committee members upon his return. “If there is to be the slightest error in the work that has been assigned to you,” he said, “and if the ceremonies are not conducted to the highest expected standards, I will personally take my pistol and shoot every one of you before taking my own life.”

By the time the queen was enlisted to help out several months later, either it was too late to cancel the European contracts or amending them risked mass disruptions. “It was supposed to be a celebration of Iran,” she explained, “but instead everything was being done by these foreign companies. Besides being a huge waste of money, I felt it sent a bad message to the world: that we Iranians are not capable, our designs are not good enough, our food is not good enough.”

To try to salvage what she could, Pahlavi promoted a conference of Persian studies, to be held in conjunction with the Persepolis festivities and attended by top scholars from around the world. The celebration would also be marked by the opening of twenty-five hundred new rural schools, as well as cultural exhibitions in cities across the United States and Europe. Determined to inject an Iranian accent wherever she could, the queen announced that all the dresses she wore at Persepolis would be made solely from Iranian fabric and design and that the last evening of the three-day festival was to be given over to a showcasing of Iranian artisanry and cuisine.

In the frantic final run-up, Pahlavi largely subsisted on a diet of tranquilizers and Winston cigarettes. Even then, however, she was given to seeing a certain humor in her situation; as she reached for her third or fourth cigarette during an interview with an American journalist on the eve of the festival, she noted, “It’s terrible that I smoke, especially since I’m the head of the anti-cancer league.”

* * *

While quite overshadowed by the Persepolis extravaganza, the shah’s “bash in the desert” actually got under way a few days earlier in a ceremony that was both markedly more modest and far more telling of the message the monarch wished to send to the world. The location was a narrow desert valley some thirty miles away from Persepolis known as Pasargadae, the original capital of the twenty-five-hundred-year-old Achaemenid Empire, the first of the great Persian dynasties that came to dominate much of the ancient world. Pasargadae’s most notable surviving feature is a small pyramid of roughly hewn limestone reputed to be the tomb of the empire’s founder, Cyrus the Great, and it was here where the shah and shahbanou, together with perhaps a thousand invited guests, gathered on the morning of October 12, 1971.

Despite the writings of the Greek historian Herodotus, the Achaemenid Empire that Cyrus founded has never really received its fair due in Western eyes. To the contrary, in most ancient accounts the first Persian empire comes off as a particularly inept enterprise, hapless invaders who were thrashed by their vastly outnumbered Greek opponents at Marathon and Salamis and flummoxed by a mere three hundred Spartans at Thermopylae. The full story is quite different. First under Cyrus, and then consolidated by his inheritor, Darius, the Achaemenid Empire of the fourth and fifth centuries BC extended from northern Africa and southeastern Europe all the way to the edges of the Indian subcontinent and encompassed an estimated 40 percent of the world’s known population at the time, a feat of conquest never achieved before or since.

One chief source of the early Persians’ strength—and this detail, too, tended to receive short shrift in the narratives of Western scribes—was the remarkably progressive nature of their rule. Rather than enslave or put to the sword those they vanquished, the Achaemenid emperors and their satraps largely hewed to a live-and-let-live approach, allowing their varied subjects to continue to practice their religious faiths and cultural traditions so long as they remained quiescent and paid tribute to the emperor. If heartwarming, this munificent policy was also smart, enabling the Achaemenids to repeatedly retain the fealty of those they had conquered against the designs of more brutish competitors. It also established a tradition that enabled the Persians to achieve a rare feat in the ancient world, a series of renaissances. Despite being constantly attacked and reduced by a formidable roster of enemies over the ensuing centuries—the Macedonians and Romans and Byzantines; most devastating of all, the Mongols of Genghis Khan and Tamerlane—time and again dynasties of Persian shahs were able to resurrect some semblance of the fabulous empire that Cyrus and Darius had begun. During each of these resurrections, Persia was renewed as a locus of culture and civilization, both a protector and a pioneer in art and science and architecture.

It was in salute of all this that on that October morning in 1971, Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, clad in a full-dress military uniform bedecked with ribbons and medals, solemnly strode down a blue carpet to set a wreath at the base of Cyrus’s tomb under the respectful gaze of the invited dignitaries. After a long moment of meditative silence, the shah then turned and came slowly back down the carpet to step before a lectern lined with microphones. Facing his imperial forebear’s tomb, he drew out a sheaf of folded papers and, holding them tightly against the buffeting of a strong breeze coming down the valley, began his speech: “O Cyrus, great king, king of kings, emperor of the Achaemenidians, monarch of the land of Iran, I, the king of kings of Iran, offer salutations from myself and from our nation. At a time when Iran is renewing its links with history, we come here to show you the immense gratitude of a whole people, immortal hero of history, founder of the oldest empire in the world, great liberator, worthy son of humanity.”

In his speech, the shah’s goal was a good deal more ambitious than seeing how many encomiums he could string together. It was to unspool a grand narrative telling of a land of ancient glory fallen to ruin, but which now stood on the cusp of restoration, less a renaissance than the emergence of a new “Great Civilization.”

As with so many of the other so-called cradles of civilization—Egypt, Greece, Mesopotamia—Persia underwent a long period of decline after reaching its apogee. As opposed to the others, however, Persia’s position at the crossroads of three continents—Europe, Africa and Asia—ensured both enduring geopolitical significance and perpetual ferment, a place forever marched over and burned through by marauding armies and clashing empires.

This stomping-ground status took virulent new form in the modern era when, starting in the mid-nineteenth century, Persia found itself squarely in the path of two still-expanding imperial powers, Great Britain and czarist Russia. It marked the beginning of a long history of torment and humiliation the kingdom was to suffer at the hands of the West.

With czarist Russia pushing its borders ever southward in the nineteenth century, it inevitably came into confrontation with the British Empire and the string of colonial possessions it had amassed across the Middle East and Asia; by the 1850s, the most cherished of these was “the jewel in the crown,” British India. The result was a thirty-five-hundred-mile skirmish line between the two rivals, one that stretched from the eastern Mediterranean clear across the mountains of central Asia to the steppes of Tibet. Squarely at the center of this battle line lay Persia. Rather than go to the trouble of conquering the impoverished kingdom outright and risk triggering a larger war, Britain and Russia chose to engage in a contest that was to become known as the Great Game, reducing Persia to the status of imperial plaything as the two Western powers spent the next fifty years jockeying for political and economic advantage.

This plaything status actually seemed to suit the royal dynasty then ruling Persia, the Qajars, just fine. That may not be so surprising considering that when matched against the seven shahs who comprised that dynasty, even an exhaustive scouring of the history books is unlikely to yield a more venal or dissolute bunch.

From the dynasty’s founding in the 1780s by an ill-tempered castrato known as the Eunuch King, successive Qajar shahs had sought to maintain their tenuous hold on power by pitting rival tribes and warlords against one another, and to finance their legendarily debauched lifestyles by imposing taxes on whoever could be coerced into paying. For the Qajars, becoming ensnared in the Anglo-Russian Great Game represented less a stain on national honor than the advent of a new revenue stream; in what became a family tradition, successive Qajar shahs cut a dizzying array of deals with both imperial powers while signing away concessionary rights to almost anything of potential value to foreign concerns to replenish palace coffers.

But it hadn’t been mere greed that caused the Qajars to fling open Persia’s doors to foreign exploitation. This was joined to an abiding fascination with the West, a yearning to emulate its development. In the company of vast entourages, Qajar shahs made treasury-draining pilgrimages to Europe, where they were awed by the technological advances on display and feverishly signed contracts with European companies that might provide their kingdom with the same. That the Qajar court didn’t actually have the money to pay for this little concerned European governments or merchants, since shortfalls could always be made right by a new round of concessions extracted at bargain-basement prices, or by new loans extended at usurious rates. Nor were the Great Game governments overly bothered about repayment; as the Russian foreign minister noted in approving yet another loan to the Qajar court in 1903, the ultimate goal was “to make Persia obedient and useful…a tool in our hands.”

If this arrangement ensured the kingdom’s continued poverty and indebtedness, it also set it up for a series of calamities to come. Perversely, the chief trigger of these was the discovery of the commodity that might have brought Persia both autonomy and fabulous wealth: oil.

It was in May 1908 that a British exploration team, capping seven years of fruitless search, finally struck oil in a remote mountain close of southwestern Persia. And not just a little oil, but the largest field found anywhere on earth up to that time. With demand for oil growing exponentially throughout the industrialized world, the strike at Masjid-i-Suleiman promised to bestow untold riches upon those who possessed it—but alas, this group didn’t include the Persian people. Instead, in true Qajari tradition, the shah at the time had signed away the oil concession to a British industrialist for a pittance, ensuring that the lion’s share of this new wealth would flow directly to foreigners. That wasn’t the worst of it, however: The Masjid-i-Suleiman discovery also set Persia firmly on the road to one of the worst, if largely forgotten, human tragedies of the early twentieth century.

Against all odds, by the early 1910s, the British company holding the Masjid-i-Suleiman concession, Burmah Oil, proved so inept at refining and distributing its product that it stood on the verge of bankruptcy. Its situation drew the notice of the civilian head of the British navy, a feisty junior member of Parliament named Winston Churchill. Convinced that war in Europe was imminent, Churchill had been frantically searching for a reliable supply of oil for a modernized navy when a floundering Burmah came calling. In response to Churchill’s hectoring, a balky British Parliament finally agreed to buy a controlling interest in Burmah Oil’s Iranian subsidiary in July 1914, mere days before the onset of World War I.

In that war’s aftermath, a British statesman remarked that “the Allied cause floated to victory upon a wave of oil.” In his own memoirs, Churchill would credit the oil he had helped wrest from Persia as “a prize from fairyland far beyond our brightest dreams.” For Great Britain, perhaps, but for the Persian people more like an unending nightmare. Because of that oil, and despite Persia’s declaration of neutrality in World War I, the British and Russians—they had ended their Great Game competition to join forces against Germany—militarily occupied huge swaths of the country. Northwest Persia was the site of unrelieved carnage as Russia waged war against Germany’s ally Ottoman Turkey—until the sudden collapse of czarist Russia in 1917 abruptly reshuffled the battlefield. As Russia descended into civil war, Britain used Persia as a corridor to rush aid to Russia’s anticommunist Whites, drawing reprisal attacks into Persia by the Bolshevik Reds. Amid this dizzying game of musical chairs, the one stratagem all factions employed was the pillaging of Persia’s food supply, triggering mass famine. By the time the war ended, some two million Persians, or nearly 20 percent of the population, had died from starvation or disease, giving neutral Persia the awful distinction of having suffered a higher death rate in World War I than any combatant nation.

If not to the same horrific body count, a very similar subjugation was to befall the kingdom in World War II. This time, the first victim would be the King of Kings’ immediate predecessor, his father, Reza Khan.

As the fearsome chief of a Persian Cossack army, in 1925 Reza Khan had finally overthrown the last of the Qajars and shortly after made himself shah. In the escalating tensions leading up to World War II, he fully grasped that once again the kingdom was about to be caught in the vise of the competing industrialized powers of Europe, their thirst for oil now even more voracious than before. With both the British Empire and the Soviet Union perched on the border of Iran, as Reza Khan had renamed Persia in 1935, the shah sought to find “a third force” that might ensure his protection from the other two. By the late 1930s, the only potential such forces were the United States and Nazi Germany, and with the United States in the grip of another of its isolationist spells, Reza Khan turned to Berlin; to the chagrin of the British, German technicians and advisors were invited to oversee key sectors of the kingdom’s infrastructure.

This third-force ploy held up very nicely through the first two years of World War II: Britain had more than enough problems dealing with the German juggernaut elsewhere to consider meddling in Iran, and Reza Khan had little to fear from Moscow since, with the Molotov-Ribbentrop Nonaggression Pact of 1939, the Soviets had become allies of sorts with Nazi Germany. The good times ended very abruptly, however, when Hitler betrayed Stalin to launch the invasion of the Soviet Union, Operation Barbarossa, in June 1941. Just as swiftly, the old Great Game antagonists, Britain and Russia, were allies once again, and they chose to rekindle their friendship by turning to an old standby: an invasion of Iran. Within a matter of days, British and Soviet armies overran Reza Khan’s troops and compelled his abdication. Placing his twenty-one-year-old son, Mohammad Reza, on the throne as a figurehead, the invaders again proceeded to take over the kingdom’s oil fields and seaports, while creating a supply-line corridor to the hard-pressed Soviet armies fighting to the north. This development bestowed Persia-Iran with the dubious status of having declared neutrality in both world wars, only to be invaded and militarily occupied both times. Looking back over this sorrowful history, it is little wonder that the King of Kings returned to it in his speech at Pasargadae in October 1971. He did so with both a reproachful and a triumphant tone.

“During these twenty-five centuries,” he said, continuing to address Cyrus, “your country and mine has endured more horrible and tragic incidents than has ever happened in history to another nation, yet with all that, never has this nation given up or surrendered to hardship…. Many attacked this nation to destroy it, but all of them are gone and Iran remains alive.”

And not just alive, the King of Kings made clear at Pasargadae, but now embarked on a new and splendorous chapter of its history with himself as its overseer. He had set out upon this course with his White Revolution initiatives of the early 1960s, but now all was accelerating toward the Great Civilization of his visions, his rule and his achievements forming a continuum with those of the ancient immortals.

“At this moment,” he informed Cyrus, “we are all gathered here to tell you with pride that after twenty-five centuries, today, as in your glorious times, the imperial flag of Iran is victoriously raised. Today, as in your era, the name of Iran is known all around the world with respect and praise.” Perhaps in recognition that such a lofty tone is hard to sustain for very long, the shah’s speech ran a mere six or seven minutes, but at its close he repeated the line for which it was to become famous. “O Cyrus, king of kings, rest in peace, because we are awake, and we shall always stay awake.”

But for all the soaring rhetoric, the ceremony at Pasargadae fell slightly flat. One issue was the strong breeze that intermittently carried the shah’s words off on the wind. He tried speaking louder to compensate, but his voice, so mellifluous and pleasant to the ear in English and French, took on a grating, nasal tone when raised in Farsi; rather than of an emperor grandly proclaiming his inheritance, the effect was of a man shrilly struggling to make himself heard.

Against this, though, was the odd moment that occurred at ceremony’s end. Just as the shah was finishing his address, the wind that had been erratic and blustery all morning produced a great whirlpool of dust alongside Cyrus’s tomb, a funnel that then surged forward to cover those dignitaries in attendance with a film of fine sand. According to Persian superstition, an American spectator was told, this was considered a good omen.

This is probably not at all the interpretation another American, one keenly attuned to Iranian society and living just then some four hundred miles north of Pasargadae, might have rendered.

* * *

In the late summer of 1970, Michael Metrinko had a problem on his hands. A few weeks earlier, the twenty-five-year-old Peace Corps volunteer had taken up his new posting in a town called Sonqor in western Iran, there to teach English to some two hundred adolescent boys spread between three classes. The problem was that from what Metrinko could discern, none of the boys had the slightest interest in learning English or in hearing pretty much anything else he might have to say. “It was absolute bedlam,” he recalled. “I’d walk into the classroom, each one with sixty or seventy of these kids, and there’d be five different wrestling matches or fistfights going on around the room. And if I tried to stop them, it’d just cause more fights to break out.”

In desperation, the Peace Corps volunteer finally sought the advice of one of his Iranian colleagues at the school. “Do you beat them?” the Iranian teacher inquired. To Metrinko’s look of horror, his colleague shrugged. “You have to beat them. They only understand force.”

“Well, I told him I could never teach like that,” Metrinko said, “that this wasn’t the American way. ‘These students are the hope of Iran, the youngsters who are going to lead the country’ ”—he gave a dismissive flutter of his hand—“et cetera.”

On the other hand, Metrinko remembered the Peace Corps credo of respecting other cultures and adapting to local teaching methods. At the beginning of the next week, and with no improvement in classroom behavior having occurred, he strode into his first class, made for the biggest student in the room and, without a word of explanation, proceeded to beat the boy to the ground as the stunned others looked on. “And that did it,” he said. “After that, I had great classes for the rest of the year, taught a lot of English. But it involved, every week in each one of my classes, physically beating somebody up.” Emulating his fellow teachers, Metrinko learned to avoid using his fists—“very easy to hurt your fists on students”—in favor of the open hand or a wooden rod. On only the most obstreperous of pupils did he resort to the falak, or, as it’s better known in the West, the bastinado. This consisted of handing the miscreant over to the prefects who roamed the school’s hallways, who would then hoist the student into the air and beat the soles of his feet with lengths of rubber hose until he could no longer walk, a low-tech but excruciatingly painful form of torture. “But you really wanted to save that for special cases,” Metrinko advised.

Now a gregarious and acid-tongued retiree in his late seventies, Metrinko spent nearly his entire professional life in the Middle East, first as a Peace Corps volunteer, then as a State Department foreign service officer and, most recently, as a political advisor for the American embassy and various military units in Afghanistan for five years. As he cheerfully notes, his propensity for turning up in foreign lands headed for serious trouble or already in the midst of it—in addition to Afghanistan, he saw service in Syria, Yemen and Israel/Palestine—hasn’t been entirely by chance. Rather, he is drawn to people and places in extremis. That path was rather laid before him over the course of his long involvement with Iran, both before and during the revolution, and it began with his dispatch to Sonqor. As Metrinko said when looking over his fifty-year association with the region, “In an awful lot of ways, Sonqor formed me.”

By coincidence, Metrinko’s first tour in Iran, from the summer of 1970 to that of 1973, also corresponded to the years in which the nation embarked on its most dramatic economic and political transformation, when the shah at last began to achieve his dream of vaulting his kingdom onto the world stage, of it rivaling the prosperity and prowess, he would vow, of a France or West Germany.

All of which must have seemed utterly inconceivable to Metrinko on the day he showed up in Sonqor. Spread over a verdant high valley in the Zagros Mountains of western Iran, the town of perhaps ten thousand was still a remote place in 1970, separated from the nearest city of any size, Kermanshah, by a grinding four-hour bus ride over pitted dirt roads and cut off altogether for long stretches of the winter by snow. And that was just the fifty-mile span to Kermanshah; Sonqor’s distance from the boulevards and cosmopolitan salons of Tehran was more measurable in terms of generations, even centuries.

At the time of Metrinko’s arrival, it had been seven years since the shah had launched his White Revolution, his scheme to rapidly modernize Iran. In all, the campaign encompassed nineteen different initiatives, everything from industrial profit sharing to reforestation, but those that garnered the greatest attention in the Iranian countryside were a grab bag of liberal, even quasi-socialist, programs: land reform, the creation of rural health and literacy corps, women’s empowerment. In Sonqor, the modernization drive had resulted in a smattering of modest new municipal buildings going up, including three schools and two rudimentary medical clinics. Just the year before, the town had at last been electrified, which in most homes and buildings meant a single bare lightbulb hanging from a wire in the ceiling. There was still no regular radio reception, let alone television, but there was now at least a tenuous communication link to the outside world, a single telephone that was manned by an operator for several hours each day and that had to be patched through a regional trunk line. Other than a twice-weekly bus to Kermanshah, almost all local travel was still done by horse-drawn cart or foot, such that on any given day Metrinko could stand on Sonqor’s main commercial street and was unlikely to see a single motorized vehicle in either direction.

As rudimentary as all this might sound, 1970 Sonqor was a model of urbanity when compared with the outlying villages. Here, there was still neither electricity nor running water, and while the more affluent might possess a kerosene lamp, almost all inhabitants were reliant on the fuel of dried animal dung for both cooking and heat. “When you went out into some of these places,” Metrinko recalled, “and we’re talking just three, four kilometers from Sonqor, you really got the sense that life hadn’t changed much there in a thousand years.”

What also hadn’t changed, either in the town or in the villages, was the extreme religiosity of the populace. With cinemas long decried by conservative clerics as a corrupting Western influence, an attempt to open one in Sonqor had led to vocal protests, threats of violence and finally the death under mysterious circumstances of its promoter. Instead, social life centered on the town’s assortment of mosques, and its days organized around the muezzins’ call to prayer. Nor had the women’s emancipation plank of the White Revolution found much fertile ground. During Metrinko’s tenure, exactly one woman went about Sonqor unveiled. All others wore the black chador that enshrouded the body from head to foot and that had largely disappeared from Iran’s larger towns over the previous two decades. “In the time I was there, I rarely saw a woman’s face,” Metrinko remembered. “If you had been dropped in from outer space, you would have assumed that only men existed, along with lumps of black walking around the streets in heavy robes.”

One irony that amused Metrinko was that few Sonqorians comprehended the sub-rosa reason for his being there. Since the Peace Corps’ inception in 1961, one of its primary goals was for its volunteers to serve as American goodwill ambassadors abroad, essentially to soft-sell the American way of life. For its part, the Iranian government enthusiastically supported the program in order to showcase the closeness of Iranian-American ties, but both these goals depended on locals grasping precisely what an American was. “For most Sonqorians, to say I was an American just meant I was from somewhere over there,” Metrinko said, waving a hand in the air. “They weren’t pro-American or anti-American, they just didn’t have any context for me at all, so the public relations aspect to my presence was totally lost on them.”

One interesting aspect of Sonqor, the Peace Corps volunteer soon learned, was its long-standing reputation for being a hotbed of communist fervor. While this was largely a thing of the past by 1970, its residual effect was a palpable lack of enthusiasm among its residents for the staunchly anticommunist shah and a corresponding distrust of Sonqorians by the shah’s authorities. This gave rise to one of the town’s more unusual distinctions. Amid the growing personality cult promoted around the figure of the shah in the late 1960s, almost every Iranian municipality had rushed to show its fealty by begging the Ministry of Interior for permission to erect a statue of him in its main square. The Sonqor town council had joined in this stampede, only to see its petition rejected. Somewhere along the line, it seemed, a government official, taking note of the town’s leftist reputation, had decided there was a good chance the monument would be defaced or blown up and that recriminations might befall those who had approved the project in the first place. As a result, 1970 Sonqor remained one of the very few municipalities in Iran not to be graced with a statue of the King of Kings.

At the same time, outright criticism of the shah or his regime was rarely heard. Helping ensure this silence was the universally held belief that the SAVAK internal security agency operated a vast network of informants and were keeping a close and unforgiving eye out for any who dared step out of line. Metrinko was repeatedly warned—usually obliquely, since even passing on such a warning could be interpreted as an anti-state offense—that SAVAK was surely watching him. “I imagine that was true, that they were able to check off some boxes for their bosses by following me around,” he said. “But it was really more the people I would meet, rather than myself, who probably felt the heat.”

As a result, almost everyone in Sonqor at least went through the motions of obeisance to the crown. Metrinko was given an object lesson in this charade when, on the occasion of the shah’s birthday, he went to the town center to hear the mayor’s annual speech extolling the monarch. Arriving late to the “popular demonstration”—residents had been herded into the street and given flags and posters of the shah to wave as instructed—Metrinko and an Iranian friend stood so far away from the mayor’s podium that they couldn’t make out his words, but periodically his friend would interrupt their conversation to raise his hand and shout, “Javid shah!” (Long live the shah). When Metrinko finally asked why, his friend replied, “I have to; if I didn’t, SAVAK would have me in jail by tonight.”

What the Peace Corps volunteer found rather comical was bearing witness to the element of farce that police states often engender, of how easily the arrogance of officialdom can tilt into stupidity. As in all Iranian towns and cities, a favorite guessing game of Sonqorians was speculating on the identity of the SAVAK agents in their midst, a parlor game Metrinko was increasingly brought into as he gained residents’ trust. In the late summer of 1971, such speculations were abruptly resolved when the regime announced that travel to the city of Shiraz was temporarily off-limits to all private Iranian citizens, a security precaution for the upcoming international gala being held in nearby Persepolis. Except that soon after that announcement, many of those Sonqorians suspected of being secret police climbed aboard buses and left town, bound for Shiraz. “So that proved to everyone they were SAVAK.” Metrinko laughed. “They were all going down to stand guard over the shah’s party.”

By the time that festival finally got under way that October, however, Metrinko had already moved on from Sonqor to a very different corner of the kingdom, one where Iran’s ascent onto the modern stage was much further along. Whereas his time in Sonqor had underscored the sense of being in a land straddling two very different eras, Metrinko’s new posting provided a unique insight into both the promise and the pitfalls lining the path to the shah’s Great Civilization.

At the end of the 1970–71 school year, the Peace Corps volunteer had attended a summer seminar for students from a teacher-training college in the town of Mamezan, on the outskirts of Tehran. Both the age and the caliber of the students couldn’t have been more different from the unruly barefoot boys of Sonqor. These were the elite of the Literacy Corps, one of the shah’s White Revolution creations, the best and brightest of the young teachers, both male and female, who had been dispatched across the kingdom to teach the rural poor to read and write and who were now being brought to Mamezan for further training. The differences between the two places extended to the physical. In comparison to the grim cinder-block school in Sonqor, the Mamezan campus was a veritable resort, complete with tennis courts and landscaped gardens. Metrinko had proved so popular among the student teachers that at the seminar’s conclusion the college president asked if he might want to transfer there rather than return to Sonqor. “Tough call,” Metrinko said. “I must have agonized over my decision for a good two or three seconds.”

Metrinko spent the next two years teaching at Mamezan, and if Sonqor exemplified the staggering challenges facing the shah’s modernization drive, the teachers college exemplified its vast potential. With its students drawn from throughout Iran, and from all its various ethnic and religious groups, the campus served as a kind of shining example of the new society the shah professed to be building, a meritocracy where the intelligent and ambitious could rise above their class and station in life.

Yet it wasn’t long before the Peace Corps volunteer became aware of an exquisite incongruity in all this. With education and ambition also came a bridling against the status quo. Whereas in Sonqor disenchantment with the shah and his regime felt generalized and diffuse—they didn’t like the king because they were sick of seeing his posters or because his local minions were bullies—at Mamezan it found focus in the political stagnancy he was promulgating, in the culture of corruption and nepotism he tolerated. It mattered little that these educators were among the more privileged members of society, both the vanguard and the prime beneficiaries of the coming Great Civilization; they wanted sweeping change and they wanted it now. Across the college campus, students expressed their opposition to the regime in a variety of forms, through passive disobedience or consciousness-raising seminars among the more timid, by the creation of underground “action cells” among the more bold. “They didn’t advertise any of it,” Metrinko said, “and certainly they weren’t going to confide in me, because they were all still quite afraid of SAVAK, but resentment of the state was everywhere.”

But during his time at Mamezan, Metrinko also gleaned a couple of new truisms about life in a police state. One was of the fear—fear translated into a type of cowardice—that it could instill. During his tenure, student activists periodically disappeared from the campus, picked up by SAVAK for one transgression or another. “They usually reappeared after a little while,” he remembered, “not always, but usually, but when they went missing, no one commented on it. No one said a damned thing. Everyone just went on like nothing had happened.”

In just a few years, it would be the kinds of cosmopolitan students Metrinko encountered at Mamezan, earnest progressives who dreamed of instituting a Western-style democracy in their homeland, who would briefly appear to be at the forefront of the revolutionary movement against the shah. But Metrinko would also recognize the others, the traditionalists and religious conservatives who were to increasingly become the animating force of that revolution, their passion and energy born not of progressivism or Western emulation but of the fierce rejection of those very elements. These revolutionaries he recognized from Sonqor.

* * *

When asked about the festival at Persepolis more than half a century later, Farah Pahlavi sighed and gave a rueful shake of her head. “I knew it was going to be a disaster,” she said. “From the moment I became involved, I knew, but it was already too late. All we could do was try to limit the damage, but it was too late to even do much of that.”

For good reason, the multiday spectacular at Persepolis, the glorious second capital of the Achaemenid Empire, was soon to win designation by The Guinness Book of Records as the most extravagant party in world history. To accommodate the most important foreign dignitaries who would attend, over the previous year nearly sixty prefabricated bungalows built in France had been disassembled, loaded aboard Iranian air force C-130s and flown to the Iranian desert, there to be reassembled alongside the columns and temples of the emperor Darius’s ancient city. Dressed to resemble desert tents, each of the small homes consisted of two air-conditioned bedrooms with gilt fixtures and a sitting room equipped with an international telephone line, while a small army of housemaids, manservants and hairdressers stood by to answer the VIPs’ every beck and call. Off to one side was the grand banquet hall, massive enough to be touted as the largest tent ever built. Somewhat oddly considering that Persepolis was in a desert, someone had decided to encircle this tent city—its official name was the Camp of the Cloth of Gold—with thousands of cypress trees flown in from more hospitable climes, their branches graced by a reported fifty thousand imported songbirds. At least one detail regarding this herculean effort was presumably kept from the guests: After a thick layer of poison was applied to the future campsite, the carcasses of scorpions, vipers and toxic lizards had reportedly lain so thickly on the ground that it required a five-ton truck to haul them all away.

All this was mere infrastructure. To keep the invited guests both happy and occupied, the regime had arranged an array of enchanting activities: camel treks into the desert by moonlight, a grand parade highlighting crucial moments of Persian history, a magnificent meal in the banquet hall followed by fireworks and a sound-and-light show. The burden of organizing all this had fallen most heavily on Asadollah Alam and Queen Farah, and its effect showed. A punctilious diarist all his life, Alam was so overwhelmed by the demands of Persepolis that he hadn’t managed a single diary entry in eight months. For her part, the queen’s diet of cigarettes and tranquilizers had pushed her to the point of gauntness.

But such extravagance also had the effect of consigning the queen’s more thoughtful initiatives—the academic congress on Persian studies, the cultural exhibitions put on in foreign cities—far into the background. Instead, criticism of Persepolis started appearing in the Western press even before the event got under way. Taking in the early preparations, a snarky Sally Quinn of The Washington Post was especially repulsed by the handiwork of a British company hired to affix lighting displays to the capital’s lampposts. “For a mere $864,000,” she wrote, “they have buried Teheran [sic] in a layer of gold and silver plastic Persian-flavored kitsch.”

“You could already see where it was going,” Pahlavi recalled, “all the talk of the cost and how the foreigners were doing everything.”

Even at the time, the queen was candid about this foreign predominance. “People are quite right in their criticism,” she told Quinn in an interview on the eve of festivities. In particular, she wished the design and interior decoration of the Persepolis tents had been done in Iran, a way to showcase local artisanry, but there simply hadn’t been time to organize it. Plus, all was run by committee. “It was a majority decision,” the queen said. “I tried to get them to see it my way. But they were all so much older than I. Maybe it’s just a generation gap. It’s a pity.”

For the King of Kings, a singular disappointment was the shortage of A-list dignitaries in attendance. While a great many world figures did attend—by the most reliable count, the guest list included some twenty kings or emirs, sixteen presidents, three premiers, four vice presidents and nearly two dozen princes or princesses—that number failed to include the two he had most earnestly sought: the American president, Richard Nixon, and Britain’s Queen Elizabeth II. Especially with the latter, the shah and his senior minions had employed every stratagem and applied every pressure they could think of, but to no avail; as the British ambassador, Denis Wright, was to drily note, “The Queen does not do jamborees.” In their stead, from Washington came Vice President Spiro Agnew, and from London, Elizabeth’s husband, Prince Philip, together with their daughter, Anne.

But these disappointments, too, were soon put aside, especially once the grand feast got under way in the banquet hall on the evening of October 14, Queen Farah’s thirty-third birthday. Over the course of five hours, the six hundred guests arrayed along either side of a vast serpentine-shaped table—it had been especially designed to avoid any “best seats”—supped on quail eggs stuffed with silver caviar, saddle of lamb and roasted peacock filled with foie gras. All had been prepared by the chefs of the famed Maxim’s in Paris, and the attendant waiters were from Maxim’s as well; for the Persepolis fete, the Parisian restaurant had shut down for two weeks and its entire staff put aboard a chartered plane to Iran. Joining them in the tent was a gaggle of France’s finest sommeliers, poised to refill glasses with the best of Gallic wines and champagnes. On this score, the Iranian hosts might have overestimated the libationary requirements of their guests, for to accommodate them, a reported twenty-five thousand bottles of vintage wine had been brought in, working out to approximately fifteen bottles per guest per day. Then again, this ratio might have been derived from monitoring the consumption of the famed director Orson Welles, who was to narrate a government-sponsored documentary on the party.

Some of the invitees were undoubtedly still recovering from that repast when, the following afternoon, they were escorted the short distance from the Camp of the Cloth of Gold to a reviewing stand erected in the shadow of the Persepolis ruins for the commencement of the “Great Parade of History.” This entailed a nearly two-hour procession that included some seven hundred horses, twenty water buffalo and at least three motorized ships, as thousands of participants, clad in the costumes or military uniforms of salient moments in Persian history, passed in review. To prepare for the event, hundreds of Iranian soldiers had been ordered to go unshaven in recent months, the better to emulate the trademark straight-cropped beards of the ancient Assyrians and Scythians. The less hirsute among them had been forced to augment their efforts with uncomfortable beards of cotton balls dyed black.

If the subtext of the royal speech at Pasargadae had been hard to miss—the shah regarded himself as Cyrus’s imperial inheritor and expected everyone else to as well—that of the Great Parade was a bit subtler.

Obviously, some abridgment is necessary when covering twenty-five hundred years of history in a two-hour procession, but many onlookers—and this included millions of Iranians watching the spectacle live on their home televisions—found the time and attention lavished on certain Persian dynasties, the Achaemenids and Sassanids and so forth, all out of proportion to the almost nonexistent coverage of the Arab conquest of Persia in the seventh century. This might seem understandable given the historical animosity between the Persian Indo-Europeans and their Arab neighbors—rare is the civic parade that highlights one’s defeats—but it was also in this conquest that Islam supplanted Zoroastrianism as the kingdom’s faith. To religious Iranians already alert for signs of secular drift in the shah’s regime, the very scant mention in the Great Parade of the ascent of the Muslim faith was clearly deliberate.

Also perplexing to many observers was the attention and manpower devoted to the Qajars, that squalid dynasty overthrown by the shah’s father in 1925. Through their 150 years of determined misrule, the seven Qajar shahs had reduced their kingdom to an impoverished vassal state, the pawn of European imperial powers, so why at Persepolis all the plumed Qajar cavalrymen, the replicas of Qajar artillery?

The answer appeared rooted in one of the festival’s more complicated subtexts. Just as at Pasargadae, where the shah had alluded to the depredations visited on Iran by foreign powers—“your country and mine has endured more horrible and tragic incidents,” he’d intoned to Cyrus—so the attention devoted to the Qajars at Persepolis served to underscore that it was the King of Kings’ father, Reza Khan, who had put an end to them, that it was Pahlavi father and son who had cast off Iran’s yoke of servility and Western domination and set it on the path of true independence. Lending this message its complexity was that it seemed an unlikely one coming from a leader many regarded as a Western lackey, and that it should be delivered at a festival attended almost exclusively by Westerners.

By most accounts, in the days immediately following Persepolis, the shah was quite satisfied with how the celebration had come off, not at all prepared for the criticisms already descending. From abroad there came a torrent of hostile media stories. There was a distinctly snide quality to much of this coverage, the portrayal of the Iranian shah and shahbanou as a couple of nouveau riche arrivistes trying to buy their way to acceptance on the world stage. Especially nasty was the pen of Jonathan Randal of The Washington Post, who contended that the Camp of the Cloth of Gold bungalows had “all the charm of motel rooms everywhere” and dismissed the entire occasion as a pathetic exercise in bathos. Barely mentioned by the foreign press were the other initiatives that had accompanied the celebration—the new schools built or the scholarly congress—with the focus instead almost exclusively on its unseemly lavishness, a grotesquerie played out in a land where the per capita income was still less than $500 a year. Very quickly, the party’s price tag became a source of bitter controversy. While the Iranian government maintained the cost was in the range of $20 million (or roughly $140 million today), detractors placed it at up to ten times that high, with some even approaching the half-billion-dollar mark. Claims and counterclaims extended to almost every aspect of the proceedings, even to the ultimate fate of the imported songbirds, with regime critics contending all soon died in the desert heat, while regime defenders insisted they had acclimated quite nicely. Throughout was the very strong whiff of First World condescension. This was reflected in the remark of one British wag who, noting the celebrities who stayed away from Persepolis, sniffed, “You were nobody if you weren’t invited, and you were nobody if you went.”

While the shah’s domestic critics also grumbled about the celebration’s cost, their complaints took more pointed form. Not only had virtually all the construction and special events at Persepolis been performed by foreigners, but almost all those invited to the famous banquet on October 14 had been foreigners as well. There, they had dined on food flown in from Europe—only the caviar had been from Iran—served on Limoges plates and Haviland porcelains atop Porthault linens. Even the shah seemed to belatedly recognize something had gone awry. According to some sources, after viewing a rough cut of Orson Welles’s ninety-minute documentary, titled Flame of Persia, he is said to have plaintively asked, “But where are all the Iranians?”

Also coming in for derision was the famed reassurance the shah had offered Cyrus at his Pasargadae tomb—“rest in peace, because we are awake”—with the phrase becoming a go-to punch line for Iranian satirists for years to come.

The fiercest criticism came from Iran’s religious conservatives, with a special emphasis on Queen Farah’s role. For them, the shahbanou was just as much a despised and destabilizing figure as the shah—perhaps even more so for her feminist ways—and they derived considerable pleasure in attributing the shortcomings of Persepolis to her unsteady and feminine hand. This dovetailed nicely with their larger denunciation of the gala for its emphasis on Persia’s pre-Islamic history—just the shah’s latest gambit, in their estimation, in his scheme to link that period with the modern, post-Islamic state he wished to build. If that charge seemed overstated, the regime soon handed its conservative foes more ammunition when it blithely announced that Iran would shortly dispense with the Muslim calendar that had been used for centuries, for a new one calculated to honor the ancient—and again, pre-Islamic—Achaemenid Empire.

Of the shah’s opponents, none expressed their denunciations more vehemently than the exiled cleric who had sparked the bloody June 1963 riots: Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. From his home in Najaf, the center of the Shiite faith in Iraq, Khomeini had issued a decree well ahead of the Persepolis celebration, accusing Israel—“that stubborn enemy of Islam and the Koran”—of secretly arranging the gala and directing all good Muslims to not only boycott but actively resist “the devil’s festival.” Lest the point be missed, the cleric thundered, “I proclaim to the governments and heads of state that mean to take part in this abominable festival that it has no connection with the people of Iran, and that to participate in it is to participate in the murder of the oppressed people of Iran.”

On this score, there was little evidence that either the world or the King of Kings took much notice. When asked a few days after Persepolis if the ayatollah’s continuing verbal attacks might affect Iranian public opinion, the shah could barely conceal a derisive smirk. “None at all,” he replied. “The Iranian people have nothing but scorn for a man like Khomeini.”

Perhaps the shah truly did believe his religious nemesis had been consigned to the dustbin of history, or perhaps his focus was simply elsewhere, for by the time he made that statement, the monarch was already planning his next move to draw the world’s attention. It came just six weeks after Persepolis, and instead of roasted peacocks and paeans to dead kings this one involved gunplay and high-speed hovercrafts.

Chapter 3

Nothing ever happened on Greater Tunb. Located at the entrance to the Persian Gulf, the island measured barely two miles across and was separated from the mainland by twenty miles of choppy seas. In November 1971, it was home to a handful of fishing families who worked the surrounding waters in old wooden boats, perhaps 120 residents in all, and just about the only sources of entertainment were pickup soccer games or sitting on the beach to watch the parade of oil tankers angling through the nearby Strait of Hormuz. When weather permitted, that is. Even these activities were curtailed during the summer months, when daytime temperatures regularly climbed to more than 115 degrees. Curiously, this extreme heat appeared to have little effect on the extraordinary abundance and diversity of disease-bearing flies on Greater Tunb, a phenomenon it shared with the uninhabited Lesser Tunb island nearby.

As a result, when a flotilla of high-speed military hovercrafts streaked across the Gulf waters to come scudding ashore on Greater Tunb on the afternoon of November 30, 1971, it sparked considerable interest among the inhabitants, even more so when from out of the holds stormed hundreds of heavily armed Iranian navy commandos. As the soldiers explained to perplexed residents, they were there to claim sovereignty over the islands and to end a territorial dispute that, depending on whom was asked, had festered for anywhere from fifty to twenty-six hundred years.

Situated almost equidistant from the Arabian and Iranian shores of the Persian Gulf, the Tunbs, along with the nearby island of Abu Musa, had seen sporadic human settlement from both coasts since 600 BC, with various tribes and sheikhs laying intermittent claim; given their intrinsic worthlessness, no one got very exercised about the matter. That began to change in the mid-nineteenth century when Britain gained dominance over a string of Arab emirates on the south shore of the Gulf—soon to become known as the Trucial States—and recognized their claim to the islands over the protests of the Persians on the far shore. It changed in a very significant way in the early twentieth century after the discovery of oil at the north end of the Gulf, in Persia and neighboring British-controlled Mesopotamia, or Iraq. What even a casual glance at a map revealed was that the three islands formed a kind of gateway to the Strait of Hormuz, the narrow choke point through which all ships entering or leaving the Gulf must pass, so that in an increasingly oil-mad universe whoever controlled those islets also controlled the world’s most vital waterway.

Well into the 1960s, Britain, the power broker of the region, brushed aside Iran’s claims to the islands, but an inflection point was reached in early 1968, when London announced it would begin shutting down its last outposts of empire around the globe. This included the Trucial States, with Britain’s former vassals scheduled to become an independent confederation, the United Arab Emirates (UAE), in late 1971. The British announcement spurred the shah to intensified action, and for the next three years his emissaries pleaded and cajoled and threatened London to hand over the islands. Still to no avail; when the UAE became the world’s newest nation on December 1, 1971, the Tunbs and Abu Musa were slated to be an integral part.

But not if the King of Kings had a say. On November 30, just one day before UAE independence, he launched the imperial hovercrafts.

The Iranian commandos went ashore on Lesser Tunb without incident, but events took a nastier turn on Greater Tunb. There, the local police commander refused the invaders’ demand that the emirate flag be taken down and replaced with an Iranian one. In the brief firefight that ensued, the police commander and three of his colleagues were killed, along with three Iranian soldiers. It only delayed the inevitable; by the end of the day, the Iranian flag was raised and a demolition team brought in to level the Greater Tunb police station. Within a few more days, the resident fishing families were rounded up and deported to the UAE mainland.

Matters proceeded more gracefully on Abu Musa. With that island attached to a different emirate, Iranian officials had simply announced they were taking half, whether anyone wished to contest the matter or not. On that same day of November 30, 1971, an Iranian naval commander came ashore at Abu Musa to delineate Iran’s territorial claim and engage in a show of friendship with the emir’s envoy before television cameras. Alas, the image of bonhomie didn’t last. As tends to happen with these sorts of things, the legal battle over the sovereignty of the Tunbs and Abu Musa is still being intermittently waged before international courts more than half a century later.

Far more immediately, the Iranian attack triggered alarm throughout the Middle East. The protests were loudest from Iran’s chief rival, the socialist regime in neighboring Iraq, but the move also infuriated the shah’s fellow royals in oil-producing Saudi Arabia and Kuwait. In capitals across the region—across the world, in fact—the seizure of the islands was seen as a brazen attempt by Iran to become the military and economic policeman of the Gulf by seizing control of its narrowest point.

It also raised the question of why the shah had chosen that particular moment to strike.

In one respect, the answer was obvious. By moving when he did, the shah technically picked a fight with Great Britain, a spent colonial power limping its way off the world stage, rather than with the new UAE nation. And for all the political hand-wringing that followed, everyone knew some kind of Iranian power play was in the offing—they had been threatening it for years—and it played to the benefit of all that it occur during this hazy interregnum period, a diplomatic golden hour when statesmen could rail about territorial violations and unprovoked aggression without actually doing anything about it.

On another level, though, the timing seemed strange. It had been just six weeks since the Persepolis gala, where the shah had spoken of being the inheritor of a Persian empire built on the principles of peaceful coexistence, goodwill and tolerance. That could be dismissed as so much speechifying, of course, but at Persepolis the shah had also graciously wooed many of his same Arab neighbors who, he had to know, would shortly be furious with him. And what of the British? Almost until Persepolis eve, the king and his emissaries had clung to the hope of a last-minute change of heart at Buckingham Palace, a declaration that Queen Elizabeth might grace the proceedings with her presence after all. Was it possible, some observers wondered, that the shah had launched the attacks as a kind of revenge, a way to embarrass Britain as he felt Britain had embarrassed him at Persepolis? Lending this theory credence was the long list of indignities that Iran had suffered at the hands of the British over the years, a litany that would seem to make a desire for payback quite understandable.

But in this, the observers and armchair psychologists surely had it wrong; the shah was far too keen a strategist to act out of base revenge alone, and in fact evidence suggests the British secretly acquiesced to the Iranian seizures ahead of time. Instead, his attack of November 1971 was the logical next step in a scheme the King of Kings had been trying to enact his entire adult life, and its primary focus wasn’t his Gulf neighbors or the British government but a world leader situated six thousand miles west of Tehran: the president of the United States. That scheme was to inextricably tie the future of Iran—and more particularly, the future of the shah’s Peacock Throne—to that of the United States, to so thoroughly interweave their needs and goals and interests as to make a rupture between the two unthinkable, impossible.

The specific target that November was Richard Nixon, but the quest had been under way ever since the shah first sat across from an American president on a cool, autumn afternoon in November 1943.

* * *

The meeting between Mohammad Reza Pahlavi and Franklin D. Roosevelt took place in a sitting room of the Soviet embassy in Tehran. In photographs taken of the encounter, the two share a short leather couch, upon which the American president stretches expansively, while the shah, clad in a military uniform, sits stiffly at the far end, his back ramrod straight, hands clasped in his lap. He looks rather like an intimidated schoolboy—perhaps to be expected in an encounter between a figurehead king just turned twenty-four and one of the great political lions of the twentieth century.

Their meeting coincided with one of the most important diplomatic milestones of World War II, the Tehran Conference of November 1943, at which the Big Three Allied leaders—Roosevelt, Stalin and Churchill—met for the first time. For four days, the three leaders and a handful of advisors huddled in consultation at the sprawling Soviet embassy compound in the Iranian capital, over the course of which was laid the foundations of a new postwar world order. Notably excluded from those talks were the shah and all other Iranian officials. In fact, the monarch had to practically beg for the audience with Roosevelt, hastily fitted in during a short break in the proceedings, and so inconsequential did the American delegation regard the meeting that no one present bothered to take notes. The humiliation visited upon the shah at the Tehran Conference was to be a source of lifelong resentment. In this regard, Mohammad Reza Pahlavi truly was an exemplar of his nation, a man and a people scarred by the slights routinely inflicted upon them by Western powers even as they sought to emulate them and gain their approval.

This dichotomy had first reached full flower under the Qajars, with their slavish desire to obtain those Western accoutrements—railroads, telegraph lines, streetlights—that would give their kingdom the patina of modernity. Ironically, they were more than willing to sell off their nation’s future to have them. In 1905, popular disgust at Qajar misrule, provoked in large part by their shameless obeisance to the West, carried Persia to the edge of civil war and led to the creation of the Middle East’s first constitution and elected parliament the following year. The kingdom’s Great Game overseers took scant notice; with the Anglo-Russian Convention penned a few months later, the competitors sliced Persia into clearly demarcated spheres of influence, without even bothering to go through the formality of consulting the titular government in Tehran. This was soon followed by the British government’s buy-in of Burmah Oil and de facto ownership of the kingdom’s oil fields.

The effect of all this was an Iranian outlook toward the West shot through with contradiction, paradoxes that would redound through the ages. Adopting Western conceptions of progress naturally implied that Eastern standards were to be viewed as obsolete or primitive, but along with the sense of inferiority this engendered, the nakedly parasitic nature of so much of the West’s dealings with the kingdom provoked intense hostility. The end result was a complex love-hate relationship with the West born of equal parts attraction, envy and deepest distrust.

If almost all Iranians harbored this feeling to some degree, surely few felt it more profoundly than the King of Kings. That’s because for him the humiliations of the West weren’t abstract or historical but visceral and directly personal, a litany of indignities first visited upon his father and then carried to him.

* * *

A set of photographs were taken of Reza Khan on April 25, 1926, the day he became shah. In them, he sits upon a jewel-studded throne and wears a gold crown but, fixing his audience with a hard stare, doesn’t seem at all pleased to be there. In the lower foreground of the photos, his six-year-old son, Mohammad Reza, clad in a military uniform and standing at rigid attention, wears the same severe gaze. In almost every subsequent father-and-son photograph taken over the next few years, the son bears a similar expression: grim, unsmiling, but also vaguely wounded. Those images caused a future British ambassador to Iran, Peter Ramsbotham, to ponder what was going on with the “tense, taut little boy” they depicted and conclude that the future King of Kings was both lonely and unloved. As for growing up in the shadow of the forbidding Reza Khan, Ramsbotham noted, “it must have been very difficult.”

With the Qajar dynasty sliding ever further into dissolution, Reza Khan had emerged as a savior of sorts, showing up in the streets of Tehran in early 1921 astride a white stallion and at the head of twelve hundred Persian Cossack cavalrymen. Despite being a physically imposing man—he stood six feet four, with jet-black eyes and a square jaw—he seemed an unlikely leader, a barely literate horseman from a minor mountain tribe. Against this, he had a talent for perceiving advantage and seizing it. Significantly, his very first act as strongman behind the throne—the reason he marched on Tehran in the first place—was to compel a craven Qajar shah to reject a British treaty that would have enshrined the kingdom’s vassal status in perpetuity. He had then turned to outdoor pursuits, leading an expanded Persian army into battle against at least nine different tribal insurgencies and thrashing the malcontents every time. In 1926, Reza Khan finally stepped from the shadows, overthrowing the last of the Qajars and naming himself shah. In selecting a regal surname, he adopted one from his home region’s dynastic past: Pahlavi.

One trait Reza Shah Pahlavi shared with the Qajars was a desire to wrench his kingdom into the modern world. With improved funding from oil receipts and the cancellation of Persia’s decades-old debts by Russia’s young Bolshevik government, the new shah launched a massive civil works scheme, building schools and colleges and medical clinics across the country. To instill a new sense of nationalism, he derided the name Persia as a foreign invention and changed it to Iran, which translated as “the land of the Aryans.” More controversially, he banned the full-length veil, or chador, for women, and demanded that all his subjects assume Western dress. To be sure, Reza Shah had his gruffer side. Packing the national parliament, or Majlis, with his loyalists, he steadily reduced that legislative body to a rubber stamp and further stifled dissent by banning independent newspapers and querulous political parties. When conservative clerics protested against his modernization programs, he stripped them of their enormous landholdings and charitable endowments. According to one oft-told story, upon hearing that a regional city was running out of bread due to an extended bakers’ strike, the shah had one of the bakers tossed into his own oven. End of strike.

Yet it wasn’t his authoritarianism that finally proved Reza Shah’s undoing, but something far riskier: standing up to the West. On the pretext of his having failed to expel his German advisors in a timely fashion during World War II, British and Soviet armies invaded Iran in August 1941 and swiftly scattered its army. In short order, Reza Shah was made to abdicate and put aboard a ship that would take him to an exile in South Africa. As an embittered Mohammad Reza Pahlavi noted in his memoir, he never saw his father again.

Having taken possession of Iran, British and Soviet forces set to the task of creating a land corridor to resupply the desperately stretched Red Army facing the Germans on the Eastern Front. They also looked for a suitably pliant figurehead to take the deposed shah’s place. Their first choice was a pampered Qajar princeling living in London, but a complication there was that the man didn’t actually speak the native language. The occupiers then cast an appraising eye on Reza Shah’s eldest son, twenty-one-year-old Mohammad Reza. They liked what they saw enough to set him on the throne. As a British diplomat noted at the time, “The young shah is not credited with much strength of character, which, if true, might suit our present circumstances.”

At least initially, this evaluation seemed to bear out. In contrast to the rough-edged Reza Shah, his Swiss-educated son came off as a shy, diffident type. David Fritzlan, one of the first American diplomats posted in wartime Tehran, found him “a timid, weak, colorless figure,” a pale slip when set next to his father. “Nobody had any high hopes for him,” Fritzlan noted. “We thought at best he could be persuaded by the British and ourselves to appoint reliable, responsible men into his government, and let them get on with things, which is pretty well what he did.”

This might have been the result, but it most certainly wasn’t the new shah’s intent. Although it escaped the notice of the patronizing Fritzlan, behind the young king’s retiring manner was both a brilliant mind and a fierce ambition. It was precisely the same ambition that would compel his attack on Greater Tunb thirty years later: to restore Iran to a modern version of its ancient grandeur with himself at its helm.

But how to possibly achieve any of that in 1941? On the day Mohammad Reza assumed the throne that September, his country was occupied by two foreign armies, those of Britain and the Soviet Union—and, with American intervention in World War II mere weeks away, about to be joined by a third. Nor was the war’s end likely to materially alter this foreign domination; thanks to Britain’s stranglehold on Iran’s oil industry, an arrangement still in place from the concession granted in 1901, peace would merely mean a return to the same rank exploitation of before. There was also the question of just what power the young shah actually possessed, since a newly emboldened Majlis had shorn Reza Shah’s son of most all kingly authority.

But in stripping the monarchy of its powers, the one prerogative parliament had overlooked was the shah’s control of military matters, his ability to bypass a Majlis-appointed war minister and issue orders directly to the military general staff. This undoubtedly seemed a moot point at the time, what with the Iranian army in tatters, but it provided a narrow path for Mohammad Reza to try to regain the command enjoyed by his father.

In a meeting with the British ambassador just three weeks after his coronation, Mohammad Reza insisted that a modernized and vastly expanded Iranian army could be of enormous help to the Allies in their fight against the Axis enemy. Of course, he added, building out that army could be done only with the generous subsidy of the British armed forces. This proposition was dead on arrival—even if the will for such a thing existed, the British could barely equip their own army in October 1941—but the young king didn’t give up. Soon after, the British ambassador reported to London that he had received a note from the shah indicating “he would like to see me fairly often, alone, and without the knowledge of politicians…. He wished he said to have the support of the British empire and to work in close agreement with His Majesty’s Legation with greatest discretion.” Again the shah was turned away, but in case it hadn’t been before, it was now clear he was trying to circumvent Iran’s civilian government.

There the matter might have ended, with Iran’s new shahanshah spurned and relegated to permanent figurehead status, if not for the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. The United States’ resulting entry into World War II radically changed the situation on the ground in Iran. By early 1942, the first of what would become thirty thousand American troops began arriving to help man the Persian Corridor, the now-joint Anglo-American operation to ferry supplies north to Stalin’s armies. The arrival of the Americans, as flush with war materiel as the British were skint, also caused the shah to fundamentally rethink his approach toward regaining his kingly powers. Ironically enough, considering the West’s past depredations of his kingdom, his new challenge was to persuade the United States, clearly an emerging superpower, to make Iran a client state. In this way, he and Iran might finally find the “third force” his father had so eagerly sought and escape the binds of the Great Game chessboard.

It was a quest that would take him decades.

Fully six years after the shah’s meeting with Roosevelt, Harry Truman finally agreed to host the Iranian monarch in Washington, but with the caveat that his would be not an official state visit but rather one of “goodwill.” Ignoring this diplomatic slight, the king immediately accepted and, instead of the three- or four-day stay in the United States typical of a visiting head of state, mapped out a four-week itinerary that would take him across the breadth of the country.

The highlight of his journey was a thirty-minute conference with Truman on the morning of November 18, 1949. The shah had clearly prepared for the event, for he swiftly launched into a detailed disquisition on the challenges facing his country and the vital role it could play in the growing confrontation between the United States and the Soviet Union. That role could be assumed, however, only if the Iranian military was vastly expanded and given up-to-date American weaponry. The Iranian monarch expounded on this topic in a subsequent meeting with the Joint Chiefs of Staff, for the first time displaying that encyclopedic knowledge of sophisticated weapons systems for which he would later become famous.

But the Americans had been prepped for these sessions as well. In a briefing paper prepared for President Truman and the other officials who were to meet with the shah, all were urged to remain as vague as possible and to parry what would surely be his extravagant requests for weaponry. Truman assiduously hewed to this advice, as did his senior generals and diplomats. The most awkward moment, according to one attendee, came in the shah’s meeting with the Joint Chiefs of Staff, at which he “poured out the details of his strategic plans in the event of a full-fledged Soviet attack on Iran—particularly Iranian needs for tanks, tank destroyers, trucks, and small-arms ammunition, and for the training of Iranian military personnel in the U.S.” The military chiefs listened respectfully but, when the king finished his presentation, barely commented. “The situation became embarrassing,” noted the American participant, and the shah left these meetings “bitterly disappointed.”

Those conferences in Washington in 1949 weren’t the first setback in the shah’s campaign to win the full favor of the United States.

The most stinging rebuff had come three years earlier, in the immediate aftermath of World War II. At the 1943 Tehran Conference, the Big Three leaders had pledged to respect Iran’s independence by withdrawing their occupying soldiers from its territory within six months of victory. When that victory came, however, Soviet troops suddenly grew bashful about departing, provoking a tense confrontation between the former allies. The 1946 Azerbaijan crisis proved to be the first major superpower standoff of the emerging Cold War, but so firmly was the shah relegated to the sidelines that he finally took his frustrations out on the American ambassador. “Do you mean that I should stay in my palace,” he thundered, “selfishly enjoy my gardens, dogs and horses, and do nothing about the tragic situation in my country?”

The American ambassador, a consummate diplomat, groped for a tactful reply, but all he could come up with was: “Well, yes.”

From such bitter experience, the shah saw that in his campaign to woo America, he faced a puzzle in two parts. First, given the United States’ well-earned reputation for inconstancy in its foreign relations, for oscillating between isolationism and militarist adventurism, it seemed the only sure way for any other nation to win its permanent attention was to be deemed indispensable, to be so vital to American political or military or economic interests that it would fight to maintain the relationship. But what did Iran possess to make it indispensable? Second, even if such indispensability was achieved, how to convince the Americans that he, the shahanshah, was the person to deliver and maintain it? The answer to the first part of that puzzle lay in somehow converting at least one of the two features that had brought Iran such unending sorrow in the past—location and oil—into a blessing.

In the late 1940s, this answer was most definitely not oil. At that time, the United States was still awash in domestic oil and could further draw on foreign fields close to home in Mexico and Venezuela. What’s more, Iranian fields were still locked up by the British and, thanks to a badly managed renegotiation of the original concession, looked to remain so until 1993. Further, a massive find in Saudi Arabia in 1938, one that dwarfed that of Iran’s Masjid-i-Suleiman field, had quickly gone under the management of an American consortium; should the United States ever be in substantial need of Middle Eastern oil, it would naturally first turn to the Arabian American Oil Company, or Aramco, in Saudi Arabia. With these factors stacked on end, the notion that Iranian oil might be used to coax American interest was pointless to even consider in the early postwar period.

That left the kingdom’s other perennial curse: location. Neutrality had obviously not worked out for Iran—witness the invasions of World Wars I and II—but with the Cold War deepening, what about wholeheartedly joining the American alliance? In concrete terms, this would mean building an Iranian army so powerful it could serve as a deterrent to Soviet expansion in the region and, in the process, become an integral—that is to say, indispensable—component in America’s Cold War containment policy.

But in his eagerness, it seemed the shah hadn’t fully appreciated the matter of regional politics—which came right back to oil. Thanks to the existing Western monopolies, the Truman administration regarded Iranian oil as essentially British oil, and Saudi oil as essentially American. Since Iran and Saudi Arabia were local rivals, an American move to bolster Iran’s military could only alarm Saudi Arabia and threaten the United States’ pleasant arrangement there. On top of this was the stumbling block that none of the shah’s grandiose pronouncements before the Joint Chiefs of Staff could surmount: the unanimous assessment of Pentagon war planners that even massive quantities of military aid to Iran could never produce the scenario he envisioned, that if it came to war, Iran’s collapse before a Soviet juggernaut would be measured in days, if not mere hours. In sum, in the early postwar era, the United States saw little reason to make a substantial investment in Iran, to regard it as anything more than a third-tier nation.

But there was something else working against the King of Kings in his dealings with the Americans, something his Western interlocutors surely never shared with him. There was about the Iranian king both a softness and a hesitation that raised doubts over his ability to inspire and command his nation. In this sphere, he seemed less his father’s son, a ruler given to bold action and brute force when required, than nearly his antithesis. To be fair, this estimation was based more on an intuitive sense of Mohammad Reza than anything he’d actually done, but it was an estimation soon put to the test.

By the close of the 1940s, the British monopoly over Iran’s oil was becoming an increasingly fraught political issue, with Iranian nationalists demanding a change in the grotesquely unfair terms that, even after a renegotiation in the early 1930s, saw only 20 percent of the profits returned to the kingdom. In actuality, it was far worse than that. With the British government and the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company (AIOC) playing a shell game, each claiming its hands were tied by the other, and the Iranian government contractually barred from even examining the ledger books, the result was outright thievery; of the $1 billion in profits drawn from Iran’s oil fields in 1950, for example, London and AIOC made off with 92 percent, while Tehran received a mere $80 million.

Spearheading calls for an overhaul was an elderly nationalist opposition leader in parliament named Mohammad Mossadegh. A spellbinding orator, Mossadegh had been a nettle in the side of Pahlavi father and son since the 1920s, and he rode to new heights of national popularity on the oil monopoly issue. In the face of British intransigence over renegotiating, Mossadegh began to advocate outright nationalization.

This placed the King of Kings, still barely thirty, in a worsening bind. He, too, sought a revision of the AIOC terms but was opposed to nationalization, fearful of the international diplomatic and political fallout likely to result. Instead, he endeavored to have it both ways, offering his measured support for nationalization in public while privately assuring the British he was actually opposed. The double game didn’t hold for long. After more British foot-dragging and the assassination of the prime minister in March 1951, Mossadegh took to the floor of parliament to demand an immediate vote for nationalization. Despite Britain’s threat of an economic blockade, the bill passed overwhelmingly and was then sent to the shah’s desk for his signature. With his powers still limited by parliament, it wasn’t clear the king had the authority to block the measure, let alone if he would keep his throne if he tried. Amid the deepening crisis, an American diplomat, George McGhee, was dispatched to Tehran to urge the shah to action.

McGhee had previously spent a good deal of time around the shah and been impressed by him, but the figure he encountered at the royal palace in March 1951 left him shocked. “As I saw him in the darkened audience chamber in which he received me, lounging on a sofa, he was a dejected, almost a broken man,” the diplomat was to recall. Still, McGhee gently prodded the king on whether there might be some way to head off Mossadegh and his nationalization push. “The Shah said he couldn’t do it. He pleaded that we not ask him to do it…. He looked lost, as if he thought the whole affair hopeless.” McGhee finally gave up and rose to leave the palace. “I left him alone in his darkened room. I will always remember his sad, brooding face.”

The shah finally signed the nationalization bill, but worse soon followed; just weeks later, he was compelled by a defiant parliament to appoint Mossadegh Iran’s new prime minister.

With its oil fields nationalized but its economy withering under Britain’s crushing blockade, Iran became steadily poorer over the following year, even as Mossadegh grew ever more bellicose. As the economic toll worsened, a widening disjuncture occurred among the Iranian people: still meteoric support for Mossadegh among the impoverished urban masses—after all, they’d never been given anything, so had little to lose—but growing disenchantment among the landed aristocracy and businessmen bearing the brunt of the financial collapse. What also became increasingly evident, even if elided from the hagiographies subsequently written, was Mossadegh’s growing streak of autocracy. Government ministers who suggested a softening of his hard-line approach were summarily dismissed from their posts, while those in open opposition were labeled parasites or British agents.

Mossadegh also set his sights on the shah, steadily chipping away at the monarch’s few remaining powers. Matters came to a head in the summer of 1952 when, while presenting a list of his new cabinet for the shah’s pro forma signature, Mossadegh boldly announced he was stripping the monarch of the authority to appoint the defense minister and army chief of staff, virtually the last vestiges of regal authority. Here, finally, the shah made a stand, refusing to sign the documents, only to be outmaneuvered when Mossadegh submitted his resignation.

For the next five days of the so-called July uprising, hundreds of thousands of protesters took to the streets of Iranian cities, their calls for Mossadegh’s reinstatement interspersed with others calling for the shah’s abdication. Amid the escalating violence—scores of demonstrators were shot to death by police—the shah capitulated, meekly inviting Mossadegh to resume his office. That, of course, also came at the cost of the king being stripped of control of the army. It seemed the shahanshah of Iran was now to become little more than a figurehead, his likeness preserved on coins and postage stamps while real power lay elsewhere.

But Mossadegh had overplayed his hand. Under the weight of the nation’s worsening economic hardships and the increasingly heavy hand of his rule, Weeping Willie—one of the nicknames Mossadegh had earned for his habit of occasionally crying or fainting away during speeches—began to shed parliamentary support. With one bloc after another turning against him, he tacitly accepted the support of an Iranian political faction he had long shunned: the Tudeh, or communist party. That gave London the opening it was looking for. In the waning days of the Truman administration in 1952, British officials began sounding out their American counterparts about sponsoring a coup against Mossadegh, only to be summarily rejected. They had much better luck with the incoming Eisenhower administration in early 1953, their alarmist talk of Iranian Reds waiting in the wings to seize control striking a responsive chord. That spring, the CIA took over a covert operation originally built out by the British to overthrow “The Fainting Fanatic” and restore the far more pliant shah to his kingly powers.

But not, it seemed, if left up to the shah to decide. Discreetly presented with the coup idea, he first enthusiastically endorsed the plan but then hesitated. Very soon, hesitation turned into paralysis and then edged toward full-bore collapse. Even a steadfastly sympathetic biographer, Andrew Scott Cooper, found it difficult to cast the shah’s strange behavior during this period in a kindly light. “Isolated in the palace and ignored by his ministers, the Shah’s moods vacillated between elation and despair,” Cooper wrote. “He sank into such a fitful state of depression that his closest aides ‘feared complete nervous breakdown and irrational action.’ ” The shah’s young wife at the time, Soraya Esfandiary, was appalled by the quivering wreck before her. “I could no longer bear the weak man he had become,” she wrote in her memoir, “a king incapable of making a decision, a pawn manipulated by great powers, a puppet ceaselessly torn between the advice of some and the warnings of others.”

Finally, in early August 1953 and with those CIA officers detailed to oversee Operation Ajax already secreted in Tehran safe houses, the shah gave his go-ahead—only to swiftly backtrack once again. With the operational clock ticking toward zero hour, the CIA officer in charge of Ajax, Kermit Roosevelt, snuck into the royal palace to compel the king to sign the decree dismissing Mossadegh, bluntly informing him that the coup was going forward with or without him. The shah signed, but then devised his own backup plan: The following morning, he and his wife flew out of Tehran for a secluded royal estate on the Caspian Sea, a way station for a potentially much longer journey. “If by any horrible chance things go wrong,” he told Roosevelt by telephone, “the empress and I will take our plane straight to Baghdad.”

And things did go wrong—very wrong. Tipped that a coup was in the offing, Mossadegh commanded his own supporters into the streets. For the next two days, Tehran was the scene of bloody clashes between rival factions of civilians and military units, with the Mossadegh forces gradually gaining the upper hand. In a last-gasp effort, and even as his Operation Ajax colleagues prepared to flee the capital, Roosevelt dispatched a rent-a-mob of bazaari hoodlums into the fray, a move that, against all odds, turned the tide. By August 19, Mossadegh had gone into hiding as military units loyal to the shah consolidated their hold on the capital.

But where was the shah? Not in Tehran, and not even in his Caspian Sea palace. True to his word, with the coup initially appearing to have failed, the king, a highly trained and avid pilot, had scrambled aboard his private plane and flown to neighboring Iraq. And he hadn’t stopped there. When word came on August 19 that the coup was a success after all, he and Soraya were having lunch in the dining room of the Hotel Excelsior in Rome. It was a somewhat sheepish King of Kings who returned to Tehran three days later to reassume the Peacock Throne.

Rather understandably, for those American officials involved in formulating Iranian policy, there now clung to the shah a reputation of being fainthearted, even a coward. That reputation would remain in place for the next ten years, right up until the June 1963 riots that accompanied the arrest of Ayatollah Khomeini. In that moment of crisis, too, the shah would vacillate—“but what shall we do?” he fretfully asked Prime Minister Asadollah Alam—but by taking credit for Alam’s harsh response, the monarch was to take on a new sheen in the appraisal of his American friends: a hard man, a man of action.

And from these twinned crises a new bundle of paradoxes arose, a bundle that would both provoke and decide the course of the future Iranian Revolution.

In sponsoring Operation Ajax, the United States had involved itself in Iranian affairs to a degree from which there could never be an easy exit. Further, while its signal role in toppling Mossadegh and restoring the shah would remain unknown to the vast majority of Americans—due more to lack of interest than any sophisticated withholding of information—that role was to be common knowledge among Iranians from the summer of 1953 onward, forever marking the King of Kings as “the American shah” in the eyes of his countrymen. Far less quick to embrace that sobriquet, however, were the Americans, with the shah’s timorous behavior in the moment of crisis deepening their doubts that their man in Tehran had “the right stuff.”

This was reversed—and a new set of paradoxes added—by the events of 1963 and the perversely symbiotic relationship that then arose between the King of Kings and Ruhollah Khomeini. By outward appearances, Khomeini was the foe the once-timid shah resolutely quashed, the malcontent bundled aboard an airplane and thrown into exile, his vanquishing serving as a shining example of the king’s newfound steeliness. For Khomeini, the shah was the enemy who had plucked him from obscurity and who, rather than diminish him with the anonymity of prison or internal exile—the fate of most Iranian dissidents—cast him onto a broader stage where he could continue his attacks unhindered. In this way, both men had their places set for the revolution to come.

The ten years between those two events, however, were marked by only small steps toward the alliance the shah so ardently sought. Despite its sponsorship of the 1953 coup, in the aftermath of which the shah banned political parties and assumed dictatorial powers, the Eisenhower administration remained wary of investing too heavily in the kingdom. In particular, neither Eisenhower nor his normally bellicose secretary of state, John Foster Dulles, saw any purpose in building up the kind of top-shelf military the shah clearly yearned for, and for much the same reasons it had been rejected by Truman. The administration did tinker at the margins, however. Doubled in size was the American Military Assistance Advisory Group (MAAG), tasked to oversee the modernization of the Iranian military, while a team of American security specialists were sent to train the rural gendarmerie. In 1957, CIA advisors helped the shah develop and organize his new national security agency, best known by its Farsi acronym of SAVAK and soon to develop a reputation for brutality. In that same year, Washington and Tehran signed a secret deal for the establishment of two state-of-the-art electronic listening posts in northeastern Iran, enabling the CIA and American military technicians to monitor Soviet military movements and communications over a vast swath of Soviet Central Asia. All this helped tighten the bonds between the two nations, of course, but far too incrementally for the impatient shah’s liking.

To try to hasten the process, he now had something new to offer the Americans: money. One huge side benefit of the 1953 coup was a dismantling of the British monopoly on Iran’s oil industry—not at all coincidentally, it was handed over to a consortium largely composed of American oil companies—and a dramatic increase in state oil revenues. This meant the king could now shop for many of the items on his armaments wish list rather than beg for them as he had been compelled to do in the past. Except that now, instead of pleading insufficient stockpiles, the United States and other Western governments were apt to refuse his money on the pretext that such a sale might spur a regional arms race or, most insultingly, because the Iranian army wasn’t yet capable of handling a particular weapons system. Lurking in the background of these considerations, though, was the West’s lingering concerns over just how firmly the King of Kings was in control, of what might happen if he were again put to the test.

These concerns had redoubled under the Kennedy administration. Amid growing signs of intense dissatisfaction among the Iranian people, from almost the day he took office in January 1961, Kennedy and his senior advisors took to lecturing the monarch on the need to broaden and liberalize his kingdom’s political landscape. They also urged him to spend less of his oil revenues on weapons systems to counter a perceived communist threat and more on those social and economic programs that might steer the masses away from communism in the first place. While such unsolicited advice undoubtedly helped spur the shah’s White Revolution reforms of 1963, it also drove U.S.-Iranian relations to the lowest point of the shah’s entire reign.

Then came the clerical riots of June 1963, shortly followed by Kennedy’s assassination. Thanks to his triumph in crushing those riots, the shah enjoyed a newfound image as a strong and reliable leader in the eyes of Kennedy’s successor, Lyndon Johnson, especially after efficiently packing off the quarrelsome Khomeini the following year. What’s more, the King of Kings was helping create American jobs with his ever-expanding arms purchases, so his hardly seemed a regime in need of scolding over its human rights record or spending priorities.

The American reappraisal of the Iranian leader was also driven by a succession of external events that were to drastically change the landscape of Middle Eastern politics in the late 1960s. The most dramatic of these was the Six-Day War of June 1967, in which Israel thrashed the armies of Egypt, Jordan and Syria and seized territory from all three. With the obvious exception of the Israeli prime minister, no regional leader benefited more from that brief conflict than the shah. Along with deeply humiliating his archrival in the region, the Egyptian president, Gamal Abdel Nasser, the debacle was an embarrassment for the larger Arab world since almost all its regimes had supported the anti-Israel war drum campaign leading up to it. By contrast, having quietly maintained diplomatic relations with Israel for many years, and then refusing to join in an abortive Arab oil embargo of Israel’s supporters in the war’s aftermath, the Iranian king solidified his image in the West as a reasonable statesman and dependable ally.

The shah also profited from a more gradual development on the world stage. By 1967, the still-expanding American military adventure in Southeast Asia was already taking on the trappings of a quagmire, playing directly into left-wing charges of “Yankee imperialism” around the globe. With a dwindling number of allies in the developing world supporting the war effort, the Johnson administration increasingly looked to those who remained steadfast. Many of these tended to be autocrats: Park Chung-hee in South Korea, Ferdinand Marcos in the Philippines, Shah Pahlavi in Iran. Naturally, the price for these dictators’ support was that the United States keep criticism of their domestic rule to a minimum, as well as lend whatever assistance was needed to see their rule maintained. In contrast to some of his earlier trips, by the time of the shah’s state visit to Washington in August 1967, lectures on the need for political reform in Iran weren’t on the agenda.

From the shah’s perspective, though, the greatest agent of change came in January 1968: Great Britain’s announcement that it would be shutting down all its far-flung colonial-era garrisons “east of the Suez” over the coming three years. Among the varied dislocations this would cause, it meant an end to the military umbrella London had maintained over the Trucial States in the Persian Gulf since the nineteenth century. Not at all clear was who might step into this power vacuum—the Americans or the Soviets or one of the regional powers like Egypt—but the King of Kings had his own favored candidate: himself.

By happy coincidence, this ambition dovetailed with the vision of Richard Nixon when he assumed the presidency the following year. Not only had Nixon fostered a friendship with the shah dating back to his days as Eisenhower’s vice president, but even while running for the presidency, he and his closest foreign policy advisor, Henry Kissinger, had begun laying plans for a fundamental shift in American foreign policy. That shift, soon to become known as the Nixon Doctrine, would be the answer to Mohammad Reza’s most fervent dreams.

With its treasury and military strength sapped by the ongoing war in Southeast Asia, Nixon and Kissinger concluded that the United States was in no position to take on new military commitments elsewhere. Instead, under the Nixon Doctrine the United States would enter into military partnerships with key allies around the world and look to them to serve as America’s regional surrogates. In the Middle East, Great Britain’s upcoming military withdrawal lent tremendous urgency to the proposal. The solution there, the Nixon administration quietly announced, was the adoption of a so-called two-pillar policy, in which Washington would anoint its two most important local allies, Saudi Arabia and Iran, to maintain stability in the region. As a senior State Department official noted, “That was just up the shah’s alley. That’s exactly what the shah wanted to hear from an American president.”

All these factors informed the calculations the shah made on the day he sent his hovercrafts toward the Tunb islands. If only for public consumption, the departing British would protest his aggression but do nothing. The former Trucial States, now the United Arab Emirates, would be outraged, but lacked both the weaponry and the political standing to respond. And what of the Americans’ reaction? In fact, this was the easiest part of the shah’s figuring, for in addition to the Nixon Doctrine there was the matter of Iranian arms purchases. By the time of the Tunb islands assault in November 1971, Tehran had used its oil receipts to quintuple its military spending in just eight years, and so much of that spending had gone to the purchase of American weaponry that Iran was now the largest foreign client of the American defense industry. Was Washington likely to upset this bountiful applecart for the sake of some sandspit islands best known for their hordes of disease-bearing flies? The shah thought not.

So it was that twenty-eight years to the day since he awkwardly shared that sofa with Franklin Roosevelt, the King of Kings had brought matters full circle. He had taken the curse of his kingdom’s location as the plaything of empires and stood it on its head, had made Iran a power in its own right, the guardian of the world’s most crucial crossroads. And he had done far more than that. Over that time, he had taken Iran from the status of a beggar nation in terms of its standing in the international arena to that of a regional powerhouse and one of the United States’ most important allies on the planet.

But even the shah could not have fully imagined where all this was to lead or what was about to be bestowed upon him. It came on the morning of May 31, 1972, just six months since he’d let slip his hovercrafts of war.

* * *

Only six people attended the meeting in the shah’s office that morning. In addition to the King of Kings himself, the most important participants were President Richard Nixon and his national security advisor, Henry Kissinger. Kissinger’s deputy, Major General Alexander Haig, was given the task of taking notes.

The American delegation had arrived in Tehran the previous afternoon, having just left a summit in Moscow, where President Nixon had signed the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty with the Soviet general secretary, Leonid Brezhnev. The official reason for the Americans’ snap visit—they were scheduled to be on the ground in Iran for less than twenty-four hours—was to brief the shah on the pact. To that end, the two heads of state and their aides had held a two-hour meeting the previous evening, but the next morning’s session was limited to just the most essential figures. It was here where the Iranian leader was about to discover the full benefit of his recent military adventurism in the Gulf.

If there had been any lingering doubts in American minds about the shah’s pluck, those had evaporated in the aftermath of Tunb; here was clearly a leader both willing and able to take robust action when necessary. This was just the sort of decisive leadership America was looking for in its surrogates around the world, and in recognition of that, Nixon announced, he was now unilaterally lifting all protocols and restrictions placed on Iran’s purchase of American weaponry. Never again would the shah be forced to suffer the indignity of answering human rights questions raised by Congress or have his armaments wish lists pored over by Pentagon and State Department bean counters. From now on, short of nuclear weapons, the King of Kings would be free to buy any American weapons system he desired, no matter how expensive or advanced, no questions asked. With the possible exception of Great Britain, no American-allied nation on earth enjoyed the carte blanche the president had just handed the Iranian king.

But as astounding as the substance of that meeting was, it was what occurred at its conclusion that most shocked those American officials who would eventually gain access to the top-secret minutes Alexander Haig kept. The most charitable assessment is that Richard Nixon, a famously awkward man, was striving to say something both flattering and heartfelt to someone he had known for nearly twenty years and whom he now regarded as a vital ally, but for whatever reason, as he prepared to leave the office, the president turned to the shah and said, “Protect me.”

It’s hard to imagine any situation in which an American president might appropriately utter those two words to a foreign head of state, and there is no record of what, if anything, the shah said in response. What Richard Nixon had just done, though, was to deliver an appeal for protection to a ruler with dictatorial powers, a massive military and delusions of grandeur. Different historians argue for different moments when the Iranian Revolution was set into motion: the 1953 coup; the 1963 clerical riots; the shah’s 1977 visit to Washington. A strong case can be made that it began on the morning of May 31, 1972, in the sunlit sitting room of a Niavaran palace.

Chapter 4

The letter was meant to mollify, but it had precisely the opposite effect. For most of 1972, the shah’s envoys had been trying to negotiate a restructuring of the profit-sharing arrangements with the Western corporations that managed Iran’s oil industry, only to be met with constant stalling. By January 1973, with the tenth anniversary of his White Revolution looming, the King of Kings was threatening to take direct operational control of Iran’s oil fields, a move that would essentially reduce the multinationals to the status of contractors. At the urging of panicked American oil industry executives, Nixon wrote the shah pleading that, “in the light of our long friendship and our mutual concern for stability in your area of the world,” he delay any such action until the two of them could study and discuss the matter further. Above all, Nixon insisted, both nations should avoid any kind of unilateral action “that could seriously affect the entire [Persian Gulf] area and the whole course of our mutual relationship.”

The letter sent the shah into a rage. After drafting a frosty reply, he called his court minister, Asadollah Alam, to his office. “Summon the U.S. ambassador,” he commanded, “and ask him what makes ours such a ‘special’ relationship when it can be jeopardized merely by the complaint of an oil company.” Alam offered that such a sarcastic tone might be counterproductive, but the king refused to soften. He was still in a fury at the royal dinner that night. “I say to hell with such special relations,” he thundered to those gathered. “We shall accept no further advice from friend or foe.” Alam neither liked nor trusted Nixon and, despite his earlier note of caution, was thrilled by the shah’s outburst. “I regret that there were so many others present,” he wrote in his diary that night, “otherwise I might have been tempted to kiss his feet.”

Days later, the shah publicly announced that the National Iranian Oil Company, a government entity, was taking direct control of the kingdom’s oil fields from the foreign corporations that had managed them under various guises since 1908. It was a landmark moment, both in the history of Iran and in the expanding powers of the King of Kings. It had taken that king fully thirty years to convert his nation’s first “curse,” its location, into an asset, an achievement realized just the previous spring with his extraordinary compact with Nixon and Kissinger. It would now take less than a year from that rancorous royal dinner for him to complete doing the same with Iran’s second curse: oil. When he did so, it would help trigger the greatest transfer of wealth in the history of the world. It would also be a feat that, as suggested by the shah’s angry response to Nixon that January, carried the tinge of revenge.

By any measure, the end of the British stranglehold on Iran’s oil industry following the 1953 coup had provided a great boost to the kingdom’s economy. Under the new consortium composed primarily of American oil companies, revenues paid into the Iranian state coffers had increased sevenfold between 1954 and 1960, and then tripled again by 1967. As impressive as this might sound, though, these revenues remained a trifle when stood against the profits of the multinationals. The crux of the issue was less greed on the part of the oil companies—despite this being the shah’s eternal suspicion—than a most peculiar feature of the global oil economy.

At no previous moment in the human experience had the demand for a commodity accelerated as rapidly as that for oil in the quarter century between 1945 and 1970. The tripling of American consumption in that period was dwarfed by the 1,500 percent increase in Western Europe and was practically negligible when set against that of Japan, the economic powerhouse of East Asia, where consumption increased more than a hundredfold. Yet during this same time frame the price for oil on the world market actually declined by an astounding 85 percent in real terms.

That’s because no matter how great the increase in consumption, a corresponding rise in the discovery and exploitation of new oil and natural gas fields meant supply always stayed ahead of demand, creating a permanent glut on the market. Who benefited from this phenomenon? Consumer nations, obviously, but also those transnational oil companies that controlled almost every aspect of the oil trade, beginning with its extraction and refinement and extending all the way to its end-user distribution. Because of that glut, the oil companies could not only set price but dictate to each oil-exporting nation how much of its product they would buy in a year, a take balanced against how much they agreed to purchase from other producers. In short, oil was a perpetual buyer’s market in which the middlemen, the multinationals, made their ever-greater profits not by raising prices but by selling ever more oil.

Further working against exporting nations was the oil policy of the United States, the world’s biggest consumer, which imposed a strict quota on oil imports in order to protect its domestic industry from foreign competitors. This quota had the effect of essentially removing the United States from the international oil marketplace, thereby giving the multinationals even greater sway everywhere else.

What infuriated the shah during this long period—as it surely did the leaders of every other oil-exporting country—was that there was no easy way to circumvent the system. If, for example, a country tried to go rogue by kicking out the multinationals and taking direct control of its oil fields, it would lack the distribution system to independently sell its product abroad—and would, of course, be immediately frozen out of those distribution systems operated by the multinationals. And if a bunch of countries got together and rebelled all at once? Even worse: In an oil-surplus world, every rebelling nation would compete to sell a greater share of its own oil, causing an even greater glut and driving prices down further. In fact, a variation of this occurred in 1967 when, in the wake of the Six-Day War, several oil-exporting Arab nations tried to impose an embargo on the United States and a group of Israeli-supporting European nations. Thanks to the import quota still in place from the Eisenhower era, the United States was barely touched by the move, while the targeted European countries were bailed out by stepped-up oil production from non-Arab nations, including Iran. Within weeks, the embargo fizzled.

What all this meant was that right through the 1960s the only way the shah might increase oil revenues was to boost production—except that since lifting oil in Iran cost more than in neighboring nations like Iraq and Saudi Arabia, the multinationals had no incentive to increase Iranian output. But that wasn’t the worst of it. While forecasts fluctuated, by the best estimate of most geologists in the late 1960s, Iran was set to run out of extractable oil in anywhere from twelve to twenty-five years; so, much like the financially strapped individual who scrambles for short-term funds at the cost of long-term ruin, the shah’s quest for greater income meant trying to come up with novel ways to burn through his chief income source even faster. To this end, in 1969 he had pitched President Nixon on the idea of the United States amassing a strategic reserve of Iranian oil, a kind of rainy-day stockpile to guard against future shortfalls. Indicative of the shah’s desperation, he offered to furnish this stockpile at the rock-bottom price of $1 per barrel in a weapons-for-oil swap, only to have Nixon turn him down. None of this made economic sense in the long term. All of it made sense in the short.

But it was at just this juncture that matters at last began to tilt in the shah’s favor. Thanks to the protectionism of the U.S. import quota, domestic American oil companies had pumped American oil like mad throughout the 1960s, so much so that by the end of the decade wells all across the country were running dry. As a consequence, a remarkable milestone was reached in the United States in the summer of 1970: For the first time in its history, the nation that once produced 85 percent of the world’s oil supply was now a net importer. Among other things, this meant the United States could no longer act as the backstop supplier in the global oil marketplace if a shortfall occurred. Instead, the controlling spigot now resided in the Persian Gulf, a region that rather suddenly accounted for two-thirds of the earth’s known oil reserves.

In this inexorably tightening market, the shah began taking an interest in an organization he’d long disdained: the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries. Although Iran had been one of the five original members of OPEC at its 1960 creation, it had proved a largely toothless outfit in the years since. This was rather to be expected in a world wallowing in an oil glut, but to the shah’s mind OPEC had the potential of turning into something quite formidable in an era of growing scarcity.

Helping this idea along was the militancy of some of the new OPEC members, and most especially of a former Libyan army colonel named Muammar Qaddafi. Once one of the poorest nations on earth, Libya had become an overnight economic juggernaut with the discovery of oil in 1964, and by 1969 it was supplying an astounding 30 percent of Western Europe’s needs. That same year, Qaddafi and a group of junior army officers seized power in a bloodless coup. Within months, the new strongman set out to dramatically raise the price for his nation’s oil and threatened to shut off the taps if his demands weren’t met. So utterly dependent was Europe that by September 1970 the multinationals capitulated. The shah loathed Qaddafi and his radical politics—in private, he referred to the Libyan dictator simply as “The Nut”—but he definitely liked his negotiating style: For the first time, the ruler of an oil-exporting nation had faced off with the multinationals and won.

The shah also found that the Nut in Tripoli made for a handy bogeyman. In February 1971, he and a group of ostensibly moderate Gulf OPEC members wrested a schedule of future incremental price increases from the oil companies by warning that radicals like Qaddafi would demand far more. The so-called Tehran Agreement marked another watershed event, the first time a group of oil-exporting nations had worked in concert to see their demands met. None doubted who had been its driver; as Asadollah Alam wrote in his diary at the gathering’s close, “All of this has been a triumph for the Shahanshah, who is rapidly assuming leadership not only over the Persian Gulf, but the Middle East and the entire oil-producing world.”

The Tehran Agreement was indeed a triumph. Over the following year, Iran’s oil receipts doubled, even as production only marginally increased. After three decades of frustration—thievery, in his view—the King of Kings was finally winning at the oil game.

While this was happening in Tehran, in Washington, D.C., President Nixon was embarking on a series of policy shifts so ultimately injurious to the American energy system that conspiracy theorists could be forgiven for thinking him an OPEC shill. In the face of spiraling inflation, in April 1971 Nixon imposed price controls across a wide spectrum of goods, including oil and natural gas. If the move had a salutary effect on American consumers, it had a profoundly negative one on the domestic oil industry, already facing rising costs for new explorations and now unable to pass those costs on to customers. With more American oil fields shutting down and the specter of shortages looming, the administration responded by suspending the quota on oil imports. This spurred a rush of orders for more cheap foreign oil and, of course, buried domestic producers even further. In just this way, and with virtually no forethought on the matter, the United States careened toward a vastly increased dependency on foreign oil, so that the 3.2 million barrels a day imported in 1970 were to nearly double by 1973, on their way to a quintupling by 1977.

How all this played with American policy makers was complex. Obviously, the Nixon administration had no desire to see more American money flow to hostile regimes like those in Libya and Iraq, let alone make the American economy vulnerable to them. On the other hand, when it came to an ally like Iran, the increase in American oil purchases gave the shah more money to build up his military in pursuit of his role as regional policeman, which also freed the United States from assuming the cost and peril of that burden. Further, the massive arsenal Iran was assembling consisted largely of weapons purchased from the United States. What incremental price hikes like the Tehran Agreement came down to, then, was a kind of trade-off, a slight increase in the cost for Americans to fill up their gas tanks or heat their homes, offset by a decreased American military footprint abroad, as well as the retention of high-paying jobs in the American defense industry. What American head of state wouldn’t accept such a trade? Of course, left out of this calculus was any concern that the shah, rapidly emerging as one of the more grabby of OPEC leaders, might only be getting started on the price-hiking front. In this regard, the Nixon administration was given a taste of what was to come by the shah’s angry brush-off of Nixon’s concerns in January 1973.

In the meantime, the doubling of oil revenues flowing into the royal coffers was not just building out the Middle East’s most powerful military but causing the entire Iranian economy to roar. One who witnessed this spectacle firsthand was the Christian evangelist from southern Virginia, George Braswell.

In 1971, Braswell had returned with his family to the United States, where, along with taking up a teaching position at a Baptist seminary, he began working toward a PhD in anthropology at the University of North Carolina. In this endeavor, his experiences in Iran exerted an irresistible pull; in the spring of 1973, Braswell returned to Tehran for a year of research and investigation on the differences between Iran’s state and traditional mosques, what he termed the din-e-dowlat and the din-e-mellat religious currents of the kingdom. Although he’d been away only two years, the changes that had occurred in his absence were stunning.

“It was absolutely bewildering,” he recalled. “The buildings going up, the cars—you could barely move in Tehran due to the cars—the flashing around of money. That was something you never would have seen before. Iran had always been a very modest culture, but all of a sudden everything was flashy, shiny, the flashier the better. But that was downtown and north Tehran, the wealthy parts of town. South Tehran was just a sea of shacks. I had spent a lot of time down there before, but now it was massive.”

Also intensified was the division between state-sponsored mosques and their traditional counterparts, that division having grown to a chasm in his two-year absence. Across Tehran, but especially in the poorer neighborhoods at its southern and eastern reaches, storefront mosques had popped up to administer to ever-greater crowds of the faithful. “That was one of the first things I noticed,” Braswell said. “The state mosques, they still had their loyalists going to them, but the number of people going to the traditional mosques, that had just exploded. It was all the people, mostly young men, coming in from the country. That was their natural constituency.”

The timing of Braswell’s return to Tehran was to prove significant in another way: It was during his year of study there that the Iranian economy, already soaring, would launch into the stratosphere. Engineering that feat would be one of the shah’s greatest achievements. It would also plant the seeds for his destruction.

* * *

In April 1973, President Nixon once again faced a stark choice in forging American energy policy. Once again, he chose badly—very badly.

More than in most other economic sectors, the oil industry is enormously affected by consumer confidence, and by early 1973 there were growing fears worldwide that oil was running out. Joined to this, the new muscularity of exporting nations in securing incremental price hikes was causing both oil companies and oil-importing nations to begin hoarding supplies. By that April, the global oil marketplace had grown so tight as to approach inducing a panic.

Four years earlier, the shah had offered to build Nixon a strategic reserve of oil at a cost of $1 per barrel, an American stockpile to ease the very kind of market tightening that was now occurring. It was obviously too late for such a solution in April 1973, but with oil now hovering around $3 a barrel and looking to climb, the president chose what amounted to nearly the precise opposite approach: a complete cancellation of the import quotas that had been in place since the Eisenhower era. In the import stampede this triggered, prices did not stabilize. To the contrary, this sudden buy-up in the American market caused oil prices to spike worldwide, sending other consuming nations rushing to buy and hoard more. Very much like a run on a bank, by the end of that summer frenzied buying on the international market pushed the price of oil toward $4 a barrel, and the small incremental increases first outlined in the Tehran Agreement of 1971 increasingly seemed the stuff of fantasy. Simultaneously, foreign oil leaped from 15 percent of American consumption in April on its way to more than 30 percent by the end of the year.

But there was something else lurking just beneath the surface of things, another potential snag that by the beginning of October 1973 deeply unsettled those select few who truly understood the global oil market. Over the previous quarter century, there had almost always existed a small cushion between daily oil production and oil consumption around the world, enough for the industry to swiftly respond if a temporary rupture occurred in one segment of the supply chain. By the autumn of 1973, though, the ongoing panic buying was causing that cushion to dwindle away to virtually nothing, so that even a minor disruption somewhere along the supply chain was likely to wreak havoc. And what if such a disruption wasn’t minor but massive? The Western world was to find the unpleasant answer to that question starting on the early morning of October 6, 1973, thanks to a bold stroke by the Egyptian president, Anwar Sadat.

Ever since succeeding Gamal Abdel Nasser in 1970, Sadat had made plain his intention to reclaim the Sinai Peninsula that Israel had seized in the 1967 Six-Day War, whether by negotiation or by force. Appealing to the cause of Arab solidarity, over the course of 1973 he had lobbied the leaders of several Arab oil-producing nations, most notably King Faisal of Saudi Arabia, to help bring this about by using their oil as a pressure point against Washington and Israel’s other Western allies, to threaten an oil embargo if Israel didn’t negotiate in good faith and, if it came to war, to impose such an embargo until Israel gave the Sinai back. While Iran wasn’t an Arab nation, President Sadat found a most receptive audience in Tehran.

In contrast to his antipathy for Nasser, the shah had developed a close friendship with Sadat, enough for the Egyptian president to at least obliquely tip off the Iranian monarch in the autumn of 1973 that an attack on Israel was coming. The shah certainly wasn’t going to join in such an attack, given the historic ties between Iran and Israel, but neither was he unduly upset to hear the first news dispatches of October 6.

On that morning, Egyptian and Syrian fighter jets launched a surprise raid on Israeli airfields, complementing an armored thrust across the Suez Canal by Egyptian ground forces and a corresponding Syrian attack on the Israeli-held Golan Heights. Caught flat-footed, the vaunted Israeli army suffered heavy early casualties and fell back in disarray before finally regrouping. With the Soviets rushing replenishing military supplies to Egypt and Syria, and the United States doing likewise for Israel, the battlefield equation gradually reversed itself until a UN-brokered cease-fire was set in place in late October. Even before that, however, the economies of the Western world incurred the first of what would prove to be three massive body blows in rapid succession. Each one either was engineered by or played to the enormous benefit of the shah.

Amid the international alarm caused by the war, the oil ministers of the OPEC Gulf nations held an emergency meeting in Kuwait on October 16. Over the next three days, as the Arab-Israeli fighting continued, they steadily ratcheted up oil prices while also announcing cuts in production, so that in a mere seventy-two hours the price for Gulf oil jumped to more than $5 a barrel. A driving force behind this hike was the Iranian finance minister, Jamshid Amouzegar—which, of course, was another way of saying the shah. Much more was to come.

With the Iranian delegation having conveniently departed Kuwait on October 19, the Arab oil ministers, led by Saudi Arabia, announced an oil embargo against the United States in retaliation for its airlifting of arms to Israel. To block the kind of rerouting of supplies that had scuttled the 1967 embargo, the Arab ministers further decreed an immediate 5 percent reduction in oil production, to be followed by a further 5 percent reduction every month until the Arab world’s demands against Israel were met. It was a masterful stroke, and one to which Western economies had no response. Instantly, a new set of panic buying triggered shortages across the Western world. In the United States, the stock market plummeted, unemployment soared, and there soon came the spectacle of mile-long lines of cars with their drivers waiting hours for gasoline—and paying double the price of weeks earlier—from the few stations not yet run dry.

As in 1967, Iran was not a party to the 1973 Arab oil embargo; to the contrary, with his delegation having left Kuwait on the eve of that decision, the shah could profess to have been ignorant of the Arab plan. Instead, capitalizing on the yawning shortages now opening up around the globe, he swiftly ramped up Iranian production, selling to a desperate West, as well as to Israel, at the jacked-up price he’d helped engineer just days earlier.

But the King of Kings wasn’t done yet. With the economic pain of the embargo and production cutbacks shuddering through world economies, some of the more conservative OPEC oil ministers quickly began having second thoughts, recognizing that a global depression would ultimately hurt them as well. Chief among these was Saudi Arabia’s oil minister, Sheikh Zaki Yamani, who, at another OPEC meeting in Tehran in late December, urged restraint. That meeting was to once again provide the shah with the opportunity to pull off a financial coup while portraying himself as a moderate beset by extremists. With the Saudis looking to set a new oil price at no higher than $8 a barrel, but some militants asking for increases as high as $23, the shah strenuously pushed for the “compromise” post price of $11.65. So firmly did he hold to the number that Yamani finally gave way, and since Saudi Arabia remained the world’s largest oil exporter, this set the bar for everyone else. Once again, the shah had been instrumental in spiking the price of oil—it had now quadrupled in less than six months—but at the conclusion of the Tehran conclave he could claim with a straight face that he had acted with “kindness and generosity” to the West in turning back the extortionary demands of his radical colleagues.

For the shah, such resounding victory after so many years of frustration also carried the sweet scent of payback, and perhaps even such a fiercely self-disciplined man couldn’t help but gloat a bit. In the wake of the Tehran Conference, and as the industrialized world spiraled into devastating recession, the king improbably sought to recast himself as the voice of environmental conscience. For far too long, he lectured, the West had despoiled its own rivers and skies by its slavish addiction to cheap foreign oil. By raising prices, he argued, the oil-producing nations were helping wean the others from their wasteful ways and encouraging the development of alternative energy sources less harmful to the planet. All these were quite valid points, of course, but few in the West appreciated the message being delivered by a smug Iranian king. Certainly he won himself few new American friends during a heavily viewed appearance on CBS’s 60 Minutes; after placidly listening to the interviewer Mike Wallace recite the myriad ways the price jump was inflicting suffering on the American people, the shah smiled and replied, “You’re going to get used to it.”

But then, why should he care? The West had no choice but to pay, and pay it did. Between 1970 and 1973, Iran’s annual oil receipts had grown from $1.2 billion to $4.4 billion, thanks to both increased production and the sorts of modest price rises the shah had engineered with his 1971 Tehran Agreement. In the single year of 1974, with oil now set at $11.65 a barrel, those receipts would quintuple to $21.4 billion. Put in broader context, in less than twenty years, Iran’s oil receipts had increased an astounding one hundred times over. The result was a society undergoing radical change practically by the day.

Given the profound importance Iran had now assumed for the United States in almost every sphere—economically, of course, but also politically and militarily—one might expect America’s in-country representatives to take a keen interest in examining those changes, to explore what was happening under the surface of things in Iran so as to better gauge any potential dangers to the relationship. In this regard, though, as with so many other aspects of U.S.-Iranian relations, matters didn’t necessarily play to expectations.

* * *

It’s a rather obvious truism that the importance one country places on its ties with another is reflected in the size of its diplomatic mission. In the late 1940s, the American legation to Iran consisted of half a dozen staff members operating out of a small, two-story building in downtown Tehran that the ambassador at the time, comfortably ensconced in a walled compound in the foothills, rarely even visited. When this same ambassador was asked if he wished to have the protection of a Marine guard detail, a security arrangement just then coming into vogue at American diplomatic missions, he replied that his pet poodles were more than sufficient.

In the early 1950s, a much-expanded legation moved into a newly built embassy on Takht-e-Jamshid Avenue, a remarkably dreary two-story structure but one set amid a pleasant twenty-seven-acre compound of gardens and tree-lined walks. By the start of the 1960s, this building had already been outgrown. Within another decade, by the time of the Persepolis celebration, the embassy compound was studded with over a dozen more buildings, and ancillary branches of the American diplomatic mission were spread between several more office towers around the city. It underscored a remarkable evolution: In twenty-five years, the American diplomatic presence in Iran had grown from three to some three hundred, and along with the traditional consular and attaché positions found at almost any embassy, American officials in Tehran manned local outposts of an alphabet-soup list of other federal agencies: FBI, NSA, DEA, FAA.

But another truism about embassies—indeed, about almost any office place—is that the greater they grow, the more insular and remote from their surroundings—in a word, dumber—they tend to become. In this regard, by the mid-1970s the burgeoning embassy on Takht-e-Jamshid stood as a veritable citadel of fatuousness.

Some of this stemmed from features endemic to almost all American legations abroad.

Whereas a European diplomat might serve five or six years in the same foreign post, a standard tour for their American counterparts is two to three, meaning they tend to be rotated out just as they begin to gain a deeper understanding of a place. Further, while a European diplomat is expected to be at least conversant in the local language, the same doesn’t hold for his or her constantly transferring American colleague. This is especially true when it comes to “exotic” languages like Farsi. While the U.S. State Department operates an excellent foreign-language training institute, foreign service officers naturally gravitate toward those languages spoken in the greatest number of countries so as to maximize their opportunities for foreign postings. Arabic, for example, is the official language in twenty-four nations, while the “cul-de-sac” language of Farsi is spoken in only Iran and Afghanistan. As a result, even a small European embassy in Tehran in the 1970s was likely to have more Farsi-speaking members in its delegation than the half a dozen or so speakers to be found at the vastly larger American enterprise.

Another unusual feature of the typical American embassy is that a very high percentage of its secretarial and mid-level administrative staff tend to be local hires, or FSNs (foreign service nationals) in State Department parlance. In most American legations, the ratio of foreign to American staff members is around two to one, while at the embassy in Tehran it often approached three to one. Not only were these local workers naturally drawn from the better educated and more prosperous segments of society—meaning the most satisfied—but they were also undoubtedly vetted by SAVAK for their pro-government sympathies before their hiring. This meant that most American diplomats posted in Tehran in the 1970s existed inside a workaday bubble populated exclusively by English-speaking Iranians—whether FSN officemates or Iranian government officials—likely to be wholly supportive of a regime from which they benefited.

But the bubble didn’t end there. At its larger foreign missions, the State Department endeavors to import as much Americana as budgets and local sensibilities allow. In addition to American-only social and athletic clubs, this takes the form of government-funded commissaries stocked with American food products and post exchanges (PXs), emporiums where those with access can buy everything from shoe polish to stereo systems brought in from Stateside and often sold at steep discounts. The American PX in Tehran was an enormous structure the size of a modern-day Walmart or Target and moved so much product as to support a thriving black market. Most of the American families who shopped at the PX also sent their children to the Tehran American School and lived in palatial homes set behind high walls in the city’s better neighborhoods. In just this way, it was possible for an American diplomat to do an entire tour in Iran and have virtually no interaction with “regular Iranians” save for the FSNs at the embassy and one’s gardener or housemaid.

But what if an enterprising foreign service officer sought to peel back this curtain, to try to gain a sense of things past the veneer of Iranian society, to perhaps even learn the views of those not totally enamored of the shah’s rule? This was permissible to a degree, but venture very far at all past this screen and one bumped up against a defining feature of imperial Iran.

Going all the way back to the 1940s, the shah became incensed whenever he learned foreign diplomats were talking with those he considered his competitors or opposition. As U.S.-Iranian relations grew steadily closer, so did the desire of successive American ambassadors to stay on His Majesty’s good side, and the more they discouraged their underlings from consorting with malcontents or pursuing the sorts of critical fact-gathering forays known to upset him. Since the shah became more sensitive on this topic as time went on, not less, it also meant steadily fewer such forays were attempted at all. No explicit order was ever issued at the embassy forbidding contact with the king’s opponents or reporting on Iran’s ills, but none was needed. Instead, any enterprising staffer understood that persisting in such efforts ran the risk of earning them the label of troublemaker—not a career enhancer in any organization, and almost certainly not in the U.S. Foreign Service. Consequently, in the eyes of most Americans posted in Iran, the kingdom remained pretty much whatever the shah and his regime chose to tell them.

Then came the flood of oil money of the early 1970s, culminating in the Iranian gold rush of 1974, and what had been American obliviousness built on institutional characteristics became something else entirely. It became willful, an ignorance to be maintained and defended.

Perhaps no American bore more direct witness to the effects of this phenomenon than a foreign service officer named Henry Precht.

In the summer of 1972, the forty-year-old Precht was a rising star in the State Department. A navy veteran who still spoke with the slow, deep drawl of his native Savannah, he had enjoyed plum assignments in Rome and Alexandria, Egypt, before having the extraordinary good luck, from a professional standpoint, of being assigned to the Arab-Israeli desk in Washington on the very eve of the 1967 Six-Day War. On the morning he walked into State headquarters in July 1972, he was just returned from a fabulous two years as the No. 2 man at the American embassy on the tropical island nation of Mauritius and was in line for another important and highly demanding post. “I was told I was going to Tehran to be the political/military officer,” he recalled, “a key position in the embassy.”

Indeed, it was a key position—or at least it had been until recently. For the previous quarter century, the political/military officer (PMO) assigned to the Tehran embassy had served as chief liaison between the Iranian government in its efforts to obtain American military assistance and weaponry and those officials at the State Department and Pentagon tasked to evaluate those requests. The job had been quite straightforward in the early years, when an impoverished Iran begged for such assistance—Washington could, and frequently did, reject those pleas—but it had become a good deal more ticklish starting in the late 1950s, when enhanced oil receipts enabled the shah to try to buy a lot of matériel outright. In this new environment, the PMO was frequently put in the uncomfortable position of dealing with an impatient king clamoring for the swift approval and delivery of his weaponry wish list and a vast and varied Washington bureaucracy that took its time to analyze, modify—and sometimes turn down—those lists. To this was the added quirk that historically it had been the Pentagon, so often characterized as the zealous arms supplier to dictators, that consistently tried to put the brakes on the shah’s weapons-buying sprees, while the ostensibly more liberal State Department stood ready to grant his every wish. In short, it was a post that demanded tact and the ability to mollify several constituencies at once.

But again, that had been the job of the PMO. As Henry Precht discovered on that July 1972 morning when he met with the head of the State Department’s Iran desk, Jack Miklos, the position had recently undergone some radical changes. Thanks to the secret pact Nixon and Kissinger had forged with the shah just two months earlier, the PMO in Tehran need no longer worry about playing middleman—or really worry about much of anything at all. By that pact, Miklos explained to a stunned Precht, the shah was now free to “buy whatever he wanted short of nuclear weapons and the Americans wouldn’t second-guess him.” As Precht recalled, the country director then breezily suggested this was all for the best and “should solve a lot of my problems in Iran.”

From there, Precht’s orientation process only became stranger. When he asked what books he should read on contemporary Iran to prepare for his assignment, Miklos, who had headed the Iran desk for the previous five years, shrugged: “There are none.” Precht knew this wasn’t true, but the most important recent book on the Iranian political and economic scene had been written by a former CIA officer turned harsh shah critic, resulting in his tract being effectively banned around the State Department. Precht got another dismissive response when he asked about taking an introductory Farsi course; not at all necessary, he was told, since almost all the Iranian military officers he would be dealing with spoke English. As a result, Precht’s orientation checklist was speedily dispensed with. Typically, when a foreign service officer is sent to a region with which he or she is unfamiliar, State Department orientation extends for three or four weeks. Before being dispatched to one of the United States’ most important allies in the developing world, Henry Precht’s lasted all of four days.

It wasn’t until he and his family arrived in Tehran that autumn, however, that the new PMO fully grasped just how dramatically his position had changed. Rather than the traditional portfolio of liaising with Iranian military officers, much of Precht’s job now consisted of serving as advance man for the American defense industry, shepherding visiting contractors around to meetings with those Iranian military officials who acted as procurement middlemen. “There was just a constant flow of these guys into Tehran,” he recalled, “and they were trying to sell the Iranians everything under the sun.”

The savvier of American defense contractors quickly realized that closing a deal of any significance required the shah’s personal approval, so an increasing aspect of Precht’s job was ferrying these visitors up the hill to Niavaran Palace to meet the King of Kings. While these meetings had always been a feature of the shah’s imperial court—his fascination with and knowledge of all things military dated back to the first days of his rule—all was advancing to a new level of magnitude by the time Precht showed up in late 1972. Thanks first to the doubling of oil revenues that the shah had engineered with his 1971 Tehran Agreement, and then to the Nixon-Kissinger arms compact, Tehran was rapidly becoming the El Dorado of the international arms industry, the place where fabulous new strikes were to be had. As General Ellis Williamson, the head of the American Military Assistance Advisory Group at the time, noted, “The shah had an obsession with two things: the best and now.”

Not surprisingly, also growing exponentially was Tehran’s culture of corruption, the scramble of defense contractors to “win over” the right government minister or palace courtier with bribes and fixer fees. So brazen was this “5 percent” trade that even very senior Western diplomats were brought in on the act. As Peter Ramsbotham, the British ambassador at the time, was to recall, “People used to come and ask my advice on what was the going rate these days. One had to give some advice on that, I remember.”

And corruption of a rather more vile form, too, having to do with basic morality.

For almost the entirety of his reign, the shah had perceived the regime in neighboring Iraq as his most dangerous regional enemy, their mutual animosity fueled by both territorial disputes and their positioning in opposing Cold War camps. The two regimes also shared an Achilles’ heel of sorts in the form of minority populations of Kurds, an independence-minded mountain people whose ancestral homeland straddled their common border. In a long and checkered history, Iran and Iraq had used Kurdish groups as proxy fighters against each other, and in his May 1972 meeting with Nixon and Kissinger the shah had seized on the opportunity to do so in expanded form. In a top-secret rider to the top-secret compact, the American leaders agreed to augment the shah’s ongoing covert operation in support of Iraq’s rebellious Kurds by supplying them with weapons and CIA advisors. The clandestine mission, code-named Operation Torchlight, quickly became a source of bitter resentment within the CIA, since it was obvious the Kurds were only being used as pawns and would be betrayed—as they had been so often in the past—once Tehran and Baghdad chose to patch up their differences. This is exactly what happened in early 1975 when the shah and the emerging strongman of Iraq, Saddam Hussein, cut a deal that led to Iran—and by extension the CIA—abruptly cutting off aid to the Kurds. While CIA operatives in the field managed to whisk the Kurdish guerrilla leader to safety, his followers fell victim to an Iraqi ethnic cleansing campaign that saw the deaths of thousands and the wholesale deportation of the survivors from their ancestral villages. When later questioned about his role in Operation Torchlight, still regarded within the CIA as one of the most shameful episodes in agency history, a blasé Kissinger counseled that “covert action should not be confused with missionary work.”

But long before the betrayal of the Kurds, the effects of the 1972 Nixon-Kissinger-shah pact on U.S.-Iranian relations drove a fundamental shift in how American officials at all levels in both Washington and Tehran viewed their roles. No longer was it anyone’s job to question what the shah wanted or why, but rather how best to facilitate his wishes and further consolidate the bonds between their two nations. Accompanying this was an increasingly sanguine view of his hold on power. Sure, there was poverty and corruption and SAVAK could play it a wee bit rough at times, but against this the shah was propelling his kingdom into the twentieth century, a process for which his people could only be grateful.

This was certainly the prevailing view that Henry Precht picked up in the corridors of the American embassy, where the shah was often referred to simply as HIM, short for His Imperial Majesty. So uniform was this sunny outlook that at least initially Precht regarded it as a reflection of the Iranians’ own satisfaction with their situation. “When I arrived at the embassy, I was struck by the absence of any political expression,” he recalled. “The conclusion I came to was that this was a country that for the first time in its history was really making it. People who had never had much of anything now had not only refrigerators and cars and new apartments but were able to send their children overseas for education. Politics was less interesting to them than their economic well-being.”

Precht’s views on this evolved, but only with effort. After much poking around, he finally met a lone Iranian journalist, recently returned from a sabbatical in the United States, who would talk candidly about the shortcomings of the regime. So starved was Precht for some honest insights from a native that he made a point of meeting the journalist for dinner every six weeks or so: “He was the only Iranian I met in four years who would venture a word of criticism about the regime.” As for within the embassy, the PMO was to recall a single official, a lower-level analyst named Stanley Escudero, who occasionally transgressed by talking with opposition political figures. After a barrage of complaints from Iranian officials, extending up to the shah himself, Escudero was repeatedly castigated by his superiors and eventually transferred out of Iran.

By their actions, Escudero’s supervisors surely saw themselves not as the shah’s lapdogs but rather as more responsible observers of the Iranian scene than the wet blanket in their midst. After all, the shah had reigned for three decades, he had weathered many a storm, so why go searching for problems—and enrage the King of Kings in the process—where none existed?

But if this was the prevailing attitude when Precht arrived in late 1972, it was exponentially fortified over that following year by the quadrupling of oil prices. With a speed and fervor the likes of which the modern world has rarely seen, the Iranian gold rush was on.

To be sure, every other OPEC nation enjoyed massive windfalls from the price hikes, but with smaller populations—or more temperate leadership—most resisted the temptation of shoveling all that money immediately back into their economies and risk overheating. Not the shah. Against the advice of economists, he went on a massive spending binge, nearly tripling the state’s expenditures in a single year. Across Tehran, the skyline was suddenly dominated no longer by minarets but by construction cranes as dozens of high-rise office towers and apartment buildings shot up simultaneously. Along with the boom in almost everything—construction, consumer goods, food imports, new cars—a kind of frenzied euphoria took hold, a sense that this was Iran’s time and anything was possible.

“There was so much money pouring out of the oil exports,” recalled Archie Bolster, an American embassy official, “that the Shah and his people just had no limit as to what they saw themselves capable of doing. There was going to be a brand-new airport built. There was going to be a subway system built under Tehran. Roads were going to be built everywhere. A whole new city was going to be built between Tehran and the villages up north. They were going to have a whole diplomatic enclave and the largest square in the world.”

Even more immediately noticeable to many were the fantastic displays of conspicuous consumption. Lynne Lambert, an American embassy official attached to the economic section, recalled going to diplomatic functions where every Iranian woman in attendance seemed to be dripping with emeralds. “You’d go to a party,” she said, “and there were multiple bands, enough food to feed a village, sometimes champagne flowing out of fountains.” Another visitor to a wealthy Tehrani’s home inquired about the material used to create its translucent staircase, only to learn it was cut from solid crystal.

It wasn’t just Iranians caught up in the maelstrom: Like a true gold rush, the oil bonanza brought opportunists in from around the world. By far the biggest influx were Americans in the defense industry, testament to the shah’s dramatically escalated arms-buying spree. Many of these carpetbaggers laid siege to General Williamson, the MAAG commander, who estimated that upward of thirty-five defense industry executives or salesmen showed up at his door each week looking for advice. This was replicated at the embassy economic affairs office, where Lynne Lambert and her two colleagues each met with seven or eight new visitors a day. And these were just the businessmen following protocol; many others skipped MAAG and the embassy altogether to make their pitch directly to the shah and his senior generals through Iranian middlemen, self-appointed or otherwise.

This onslaught masked an even more remarkable turn of events. As Henry Precht’s tour as political/military officer extended, the American defense industry shills peddling their wares were increasingly joined by active-duty American admirals and generals. This stemmed less from the garden-variety corruption of Pentagon officials taking kickbacks from defense companies—although that undoubtedly occurred as well—than from the peculiarities of the American government’s appropriations process.

By way of illustration, let’s say the U.S. Air Force had hoped to buy ninety new-generation attack helicopters, but, due to the staggering cost per helicopter, Congress allocated funds for only sixty. Or let’s say Congress, blanching at the obscene cost, had shot down the project altogether back at the research and development (R&D) phase. In either case, persuading an allied foreign government like Iran to buy into the same helicopter program could pay handsome dividends, lowering the per-unit price in the first example so that the air force could buy more helicopters for the same money or, in the second case, reviving a previously killed system by spreading R&D costs out over more purchasers. What’s more, in the wake of the 1972 Nixon-Kissinger weapons pact, bringing Iran in on such a deal no longer meant hassling with a congressional approval process that might drag on for years but could be sealed on a mere handshake from the shah. As a result, a steady procession of American admirals and generals made for Tehran and, inevitably, for the royal office at Niavaran. So unseemly did this parade become that the State Department finally issued a directive barring Pentagon personnel from engaging in sales pitches in Iran, but to little effect. Precht recalled one meeting where the No. 2 official at the embassy called in an admiral who was energetically trying to sell the shah on a particular airplane to remind him of the no-sales-pitch policy. “Well, that may be the embassy’s policy,” the admiral replied, “but it is not the U.S. Navy’s policy. The navy’s policy is to sell these planes.”

Inevitably, Precht was pressed into the service of this stampede. After Congress imposed a strict 3,000-man limit on the number of military technical advisors to be stationed abroad, Iran was given an allocation of only 660—perhaps sufficient in normal times, but wholly insufficient amid the gold rush. As the PMO Precht helped work out the logistics whereby the 660 military technical advisors were augmented by civilians brought in under the aegis of private defense contractors. It was a bit of a shell game, but, as Precht noted, “there were no limits on those people.” Indeed not; by 1974, there were some 2,700 of these civilian advisors, almost all of them recently retired American military, living in Iran.

At the same time, the torrent of money flowing into Iranian society was fueling massive inflation and social dislocation. In south Tehran the slums of the under- and unemployed young men from the countryside were exploding in size, while the growing gulf between Iran’s rich and poor was helping fuel a nascent, but growing, leftist insurgency. In tandem, official repression was steadily ratcheting up, with SAVAK given sweeping new powers and increasingly turning to torture. George Braswell quickly picked up on a tightening climate of fear. When he and his family first came to Tehran in 1968, Braswell had been advised that SAVAK would surely tap his home telephone, that there would be at least one SAVAK plant in all his university classes. By 1973, such paranoia had magnified enormously. “They’d always been afraid of SAVAK,” Braswell noted of his Iranian contacts, “but it was a background-noise type of thing. Now it was constant. Even within the family, with their closest friends, they were very careful what they said now.”

But what of all this was being picked up by the ever-expanding American community in Iran? Again, it would seem an altogether reasonable proposition to imagine that different components of the American government were at last attempting to take the pulse of Iranian society as the gold rush got under way—but, again, a proposition quite in error.

By the 1970s, CIA Tehran was one of the largest CIA stations in the world, so surely the intelligence officers serving there were keeping a watch on the domestic situation. Except surely not. Instead, just as in the 1950s, the majority of CIA officers in Iran in the 1970s either were signals intelligence specialists overseeing the Soviet listening posts in northern Iran or were tasked to monitor local or regional communist groups, with only the occasional intrepid officer taking an interest in anything beyond. Incredibly, so relaxed was the CIA in tracking Iranian domestic dissent that, according to a high-ranking National Security Council officer in the late 1960s, most of what they gathered on the topic was simply handed to them by SAVAK. This neglect was further refined by the 1972 Nixon-Kissinger pact. That pact actively discouraged federal agencies from raising questions about Iran, and since the CIA’s primary charter is to answer queries put to it by other branches of the American government, it could hardly be expected to find answers to questions not asked.

And what of the massive American military apparatus in Iran? By the mid-1970s, the American Military Assistance Advisory Group in Iran was one of the largest such advisory teams in the world, but by a stricture set down by the shah back in the 1940s, all MAAG officers were expressly forbidden to engage in domestic intelligence gathering. It was a stricture that both successive MAAG commanders and their Iranian counterparts had rigorously enforced, and one unlikely to be reexamined in the wake of either the 1972 weapons compact or the 1974 gold rush. After all, with American admirals and generals in Tehran now joining private arms salesmen at the Iranian feeding trough, what incentive did anyone in the military establishment have to look for problems?

The same, of course, could be said of the hordes of American businesspeople who descended during the gold rush. In 1970, it was estimated that about eight thousand Americans lived in Iran, but by 1975 the inundation had been so intense that Henry Precht was deputized to come up with a new estimate. “We were thinking it was probably around twenty-five or thirty thousand,” he recalled. In fact, as Precht discovered from calling around to American companies that had set up shop in the kingdom, with dependents included the number was approaching fifty thousand. Most were in defense-related fields, but one detail that united them all, as well as their prospective Iranian business partners, was the lack of any motive to perceive obstacles ahead.

This outlook naturally influenced those working at the embassy, an institution whose chief purpose, after all, is to further both public and private American interests abroad. In this regard, the quest to line up more Iranian contracts for more American companies dovetailed very nicely with the embassy’s see-no-evil ethos of the past.

This, in turn, was reinforced by a growing reluctance of most Iranians to talk candidly. Despite the claims of his most vociferous detractors, the shah hadn’t built a regime of naked terror. Nevertheless, in the average Iranian’s mind by the mid-1970s, SAVAK was omnipresent, listening in to almost any conversation, wiretapping almost every phone. Consequently, Iranians rarely spoke of politics and were careful when voicing even mild complaints about the regime. Should they harbor such complaints, they were exceedingly unlikely to share them with an American official. Not only was the United States the shah’s chief foreign patron, but Iranians from every walk of life and political persuasion were intimately familiar with the CIA’s hand in restoring him to the throne in 1953. George Braswell had picked up on this very early in his Tehran days. “I didn’t know anything about our role in that coup,” he recalled, “and I don’t think most Americans did. But, boy, the Iranians sure did. They all talked about it, and I think it was the source of a lot of resentment.” Naturally, that resentment was most keenly felt by the shah’s opponents, and since the United States was guardian of the status quo, what could possibly be gained by talking to its representatives?

By the time of the gold rush, another factor helped maintain this wall of obliviousness. Beginning in 1970, several nascent anti-shah guerrilla groups had formed, and by 1974 they had been responsible for the killing of several Americans. This hardly constituted a pogrom considering the tens of thousands of Americans now living in the kingdom, but as Henry Precht acerbically noted when asked why he and his embassy colleagues didn’t meet with Iranian opposition figures, “You don’t try to set up meetings with people who want to kill you.” While nothing to resemble the fortified bunkers that so many American embassies were to become in the wake of the September 11, 2001, attacks, by the mid-1970s the embassy on Takht-e-Jamshid Avenue was becoming an ever more cloistered space, its occupants receiving frequent warnings about the sorts of people and places beyond its walls to avoid.

But what of those Americans who didn’t have a vested interest in seeing only blue skies over Iran, that scattering of merchants or journalists or travelers attuned to look beneath the surface of things? It’s something of a cliché in the Middle East that often the best-informed Westerners are oilmen, since they’re out in the field and hear the complaints of “normal people.” Except in contrast to other oil-producing nations in the region, Western oilmen were rarely in the field in Iran—those fields had been nationalized, and even senior on-site managerial positions were held by locals—but sitting in air-conditioned offices in Tehran. As for foreign journalists, those with the temerity to report critically about the kingdom were likely to see their working days there brought to an abrupt end, either frozen out by government officials or denied a future visa. In theory, Western diplomatic missions were meant to fight for journalistic independence; in practice, when an article critical of the shah appeared in The New York Times or The Guardian, it was often the humiliating task of the American or British ambassador to scurry up the hill to reassure the royal palace that their government didn’t believe a word of it.

And so, finally, what of the random investigator like George Braswell, the observer who, by chance or diligence or force of personality, happened upon something in Iran of potentially great importance? Was it possible for such a person to breach the wall of ignorance separating him from the official American community?

When first arriving back in Tehran, Braswell had registered with the American embassy and spoken with several officials there about the subject of his dissertation. Affable as ever, he offered to share his findings with embassy officials, but over the course of the following year he was never contacted. “Not a lunch. Not a cup of coffee.”

But again, what was there really to worry about? By the time of the gold rush, the shah had weathered any number of regional crises and emerged the stronger for them. For three decades, observers had been writing his obituary, but he was still there. Further, over the previous ten years, he had largely dispensed with the old palace hangers-on and replaced them with technocrats, highly educated men—and the occasional woman—who understood how the modern world worked. In perhaps the greatest indication of stability, during those same ten years he had enjoyed the loyal and steady presence of a single prime minister, Amir Abbas Hoveyda, in replacement of the staggering number of prime ministers—twenty-eight in twenty-four years—who had come and gone before him. Simultaneously, Iran now enjoyed peaceable relations with all its neighbors, an enduring détente with the Soviet Union and an annual growth rate that made it likely the kingdom would achieve the shah’s boast of equaling the standard of living of France or Germany within the next decade. In short, what could possibly go wrong?

But in all this, what very few American officials likely grasped—let alone were prepared to acknowledge—was that by the mid-1970s much of the United States’ deepening myopia about its ally in Tehran stemmed from an extraordinary transformation in U.S.-Iranian ties. In this relationship, Mohammad Reza Pahlavi was no longer the nervous schoolboy sharing a couch with Franklin Roosevelt; he was the King of Kings. And Iran was no longer the client state. That status belonged to the United States.

Chapter 5

In search of a literary reference that might parallel the rise and fall of the shah, biographers inevitably turn to one Greek myth in particular. It is the story of Icarus, of course, the fable of the brash young man who, given waxen wings, flies too close to the sun and is destroyed. Indeed, there’s almost no avoiding the comparison, for how else to describe a ruler who had at last ascended to the apex of power to which he always aspired, who helped engineer to his benefit the greatest transfer of wealth in the history of mankind, only to see it all tumble away at ferocious speed? In literature, who but Icarus to compare to the King of Kings?

Instead of mythology, in the living room of her Washington home, Farah Pahlavi, the former empress of Iran, reached for metaphor to explain the cascade of events that in a mere five years propelled her and her husband from the height of imperial splendor to a grim and fugitive exile. “I think maybe we spoke too loud,” she said softly, gazing out over her darkening lawn. “I think we were about to achieve everything we wished, but that we spoke too loud.”

This might well be true, but it surely isn’t the full answer. Collapse on the magnitude of that which occurred in imperial Iran in the 1970s simply cannot be attributable to the actions of one king or even one royal couple alone. Rather, it required the determined incompetence or cowardice of a great many actors.

* * *

On the eve of the empress Farah’s thirty-seventh birthday, October 13, 1975, the Iranian royal family was scheduled to officiate over the opening of a new athletic arena, the appropriately named Farah Sports Stadium, in east Tehran. The family was to be accompanied by their friends of many years King Constantine of Greece and his wife, Anne-Marie—or, more accurately, the former king Constantine, for just two years earlier the Greek people had abolished their monarchy by national referendum.

As he toured the stadium that afternoon to ensure all was in order for the evening’s event, Minister of Court Asadollah Alam noticed something odd: Among the row of chairs in the royal box, those reserved for Constantine and Anne-Marie were set a few inches back from the others. When Alam tracked down the palace official in charge, the great court chamberlain, he was told this setback was proper protocol for deposed royalty and that the shahanshah himself had approved it. Alam certainly wasn’t about to rearrange the chairs in defiance of the king’s orders, but knowing the royal couple as he did, he could perfectly predict what would happen when the shah and shahbanou reached the stadium. “Of course, HMQ [Her Majesty the Queen] kicked up a dreadful fuss,” Alam noted in his diary, “and insisted that the chairs be brought forward.”

As Alam hovered nearby, a disgusted Farah then turned on her husband: “Look how we’ve become slaves to protocol.”

By the time of that spat between husband and wife, it had been nearly two years since the onset of the Iranian gold rush. To many, the nation had come to resemble an enormous construction site as hospitals, universities, municipal buildings and office towers shot up everywhere. Private car ownership had exploded, as had traffic jams, while the number of Iranian students attending college abroad, long popular with the country’s aspirational class, had quintupled, with some fifty thousand Iranian students now enrolled in American colleges alone. For her part, Queen Farah was using a portion of the government’s oil receipts to build a constellation of world-class art and cultural museums and to inaugurate a buyback program in which ancient Persian artifacts long since whisked off to Western museums and galleries were bought up and returned to Iran. And then, of course, there was the shah’s magnificent military. By 1975, it was the fifth largest in the world and now accounted for nearly half of American foreign arms sales.

Basking in the glow of all this was the King of Kings, even as his megalomania took on the trappings of a personality cult. Across the country, new statues of him were going up in new village squares, freshly cut boulevards were renamed in his or his father’s honor and posters with his likeness became de rigueur for lampposts and shop walls. By 1975, it was becoming difficult to turn one’s head in almost any direction in an Iranian town or city without seeing the shah’s image somewhere.

To be expected, this aura of adulation was especially ferocious around the palace. Never one to take easily to criticism, the shah now rarely heard anything even approaching advice. More than ever, his ministers and generals and royal retainers were expected to bow, both figuratively and literally, to his person and his brilliance. Earlier in his reign, many of the shah’s ministers had developed the habit of couching their recommendations to him as having already won the favor of the British or American ambassador, the ultimate seal of approval in the royal mind. By the 1970s, this system had so advanced that ministers now frequently pleaded with those Western ambassadors to take ownership of a recommendation outright, so as to escape any fallout if His Majesty disapproved. Hampering this arrangement, though, Western ambassadors were increasingly reluctant to voice any potentially unpopular ideas to the prickly king lest it adversely affect their nations’ financial standing in Iran.

A particularly blatant example of all this occurred in late 1974 when General Mohammad Khatami, the commander of the air force and the shah’s own brother-in-law, told Asadollah Alam that a moratorium should be placed on all further fighter-jet purchases since “we’re ordering far more planes than we can possibly use.” Afraid to take the matter up with his brother-in-law, Khatami urged Alam to do so. Alam’s confidant status with the king notwithstanding, such a matter fell well out of his province as court minister, so he waited until he could get an American military official to advise precisely the same thing. When at last Alam presented this “American observation” to the shah, however, it served only to raise questions in the monarch’s mind of just what underhanded scheme the Americans might be up to; whatever it was, all the more reason to keep the fighter-jet pipeline running apace.

The shah was equally dismissive of counsel when, in early 1975, he abruptly announced the abolition of Iran’s two legal political parties, to be replaced by a single entity called Rastakhiz, or the Resurrection Party. To veiled suggestions that one-party rule sounded an awful lot like autocracy, he blithely explained that Rastakhiz would have its opposition wing, even as he questioned what it could possibly find to complain about. True to form, the shah’s courtiers labeled Rastakhiz’s creation a marvelous move and rushed to join its ranks.

But the fawning wasn’t limited to the palace. Since assuming his post in 1965, Prime Minister Hoveyda had overseen an elaborate program providing subsidies—payoffs, to put it more crassly—to many of the kingdom’s senior clerics, a sliding scale of sinecures tied to their status in the clerical hierarchy and to how faithfully they embraced the shah’s various initiatives. Similarly, mainstream political opponents and potentially troublesome tribal leaders were bought off with lucrative government contracts or the inauguration of great public works projects in their homelands. One of the benefits of a gold rush like Iran’s, the King of Kings had discovered, was its ability to defang almost any malcontent through financial largesse.

At the same time, the shah was developing an obsession with picayune matters of status and protocol—and the tiff with Queen Farah over the proper placement of chairs was hardly the worst of it. Both eager for their approval and aggrieved by their past shabby treatment, he was especially sensitive to any perceived slight at the hands of the British. He went into a fury upon receiving a letter from Lord Mountbatten, Queen Elizabeth’s cousin and a longtime acquaintance, in which the Briton had the audacity to sign off as “your friend” rather than “your obedient servant.” He became so enraged when a local newspaper ran a photograph that made it appear he had bowed to a visiting British foreign secretary that he ordered Alam to arrest everyone involved. “I’m disgusted with myself for having to take such drastic action,” the court minister noted in his diary, finally securing the journalists’ release by having the paper run a new photograph showing the foreign minister bowing to the shah.

Along with such pettiness, a profound arrogance. After the quadrupling of oil prices in December 1973, the shah had breezily explained that he was actually doing the West a favor by encouraging it to conserve. With a smug smile working at his lips, he insisted that he didn’t really wish to hurt the world’s first rank of industrialized nations with his oil price increases, since “we will soon be one of them.”

What the monarch seemed determined to ignore, however, was that the road to this promised land was being marked by tremendous turmoil, that the sudden infusion of so much money was causing havoc in almost every sphere of Iranian life.

So frenzied was Iran’s industrial development that both its transportation systems and its electrical grids had been quickly overwhelmed, resulting in massive bottlenecks of imported goods stacked up in warehouses and rolling power blackouts. All the new factories and public works projects under way in Iran’s cities had spurred such a severe housing shortage that a Tehrani professional might easily spend 75 percent of his or her income on rent. Simultaneously, a government program of subsidizing food imports for its urban populations was spurring the collapse of the nation’s agricultural base. By 1975, with rural income a shocking one-seventh that of urban dwellers, impoverished Iranians were flocking into city slums from the countryside as never before, there to face all the social ills of modern urban life: alcohol and drug addiction, unemployment, prostitution, petty crime. As a classic “one-city nation”—Tehran was seven times the size of Iran’s next-largest city—both the promise and the curse of frenetic development were most evident in the capital; as the historian James Buchan noted, “Everything and everybody converged on Tehran: migrants, traffic, sewage, factories, banks, hospitals, doctors, civil servants, heroin, divorcées.”

Hand in hand with all this was colossal corruption and staggering waste. While graft and bribe taking had long been intrinsic features of Iranian commerce, the gold rush propelled them to obscene levels. Millions vanished into the pockets of ministers and generals, while billions were wasted in development schemes of no discernible purpose, or on weapons systems the military didn’t need or have the capability to use. So many goods piled up at Iran’s ports that much of them simply rotted or rusted in warehouses, with neither the trucks nor the highways or railroads to get the materials to where they needed to go. Advanced weaponry was often permanently mothballed upon arrival, either because the military didn’t have the technicians to service it or because it had already been rendered obsolete by the purchase of even more advanced versions. At one point, the government bought four thousand new semitrucks to relieve the bottlenecks at Iranian ports, only to discover it didn’t have the drivers to man them.

Also intensifying was resentment toward the ever-greater surge of foreigners into the country. For a society that had always been wary of outsiders, not to say xenophobic, the influx of foreigners felt to many Iranians like an invasion, one both cultural and economic. While middle-class Iranians undoubtedly had less problem with the Filipina hired to clean their home or the South Korean brought in to drive their delivery truck, the flood of Westerners was a different story. In 1970, Bell Helicopter started work on a massive helicopter manufacturing and training facility on the outskirts of Isfahan, one that swiftly grew into a miniature, walled-off American city complete with apartment complexes, schools and baseball parks for the eight thousand American workers and their dependents living there. Almost as swiftly, scandalous stories of Americans racing motorcycles across mosque courtyards or Western women in halter tops shopping in downtown Isfahan became staples of Iranian street talk.

Surely not at all assuaging fears of Western domination was the identity of the new American ambassador. Starting in April 1973 and extending through the end of 1976, this was Richard Helms, a career CIA officer who just before coming to Iran had spent seven years as its director. For that sizable contingent of Iranians who discerned the machinations of the CIA behind almost every event in the kingdom, coupled to their memories of that agency’s role in restoring the shah to power in 1953, the résumé of the American ambassador put paid to all their suspicions about “the American shah.”

But to these building storm clouds, the King of Kings seemed a blend of sanguine and deluded. Complaints about 30 percent inflation, for example, he dismissed as fantasy, misinformation peddled by his enemies, and placed far more confidence in the government report that pegged it at a mere 5 percent. Those shortcomings that no amount of wishful thinking or doctored reports could hide, like the chronic housing shortages or supply bottlenecks, the shah brushed away as so many growing pains, lamentable but unavoidable by-products of a nation experiencing an annual growth rate of an unheard-of 25 or 30 percent. Similarly, with a degree of corruption endemic to Iranian society for centuries, it was foolish to think it might suddenly decline in the presence of vastly more money. As for thievery at the higher levels, a CIA station chief concluded the shah rather condoned the practice, for it gave him another weapon to hold over the heads of his ministers and potential competitors.

The deluded part was a bit more complicated. Although the Iranian communist party had never recovered from a purge following the 1953 coup, the shah remained ever vigilant against threats from the political left. That vigilance appeared at least somewhat justified in 1970 when an attack on a police station by a fledgling leftist guerrilla group left ten policemen dead. In response, the shah’s rubber-stamp parliament had approved new national security laws giving SAVAK far greater powers. In the years since, several different guerrilla cells, both leftist and Islamist, had popped up to carry out occasional attacks on government installations—certainly not enough to threaten the regime’s stability in any way, but enough for SAVAK to further expand its reach with the creation of a special antiterrorist unit. As tends to happen in such cases, the definition of “terrorist” steadily broadened, so that by the mid-1970s the number of political prisoners in Iranian jails had climbed from several hundred to an estimated four thousand. In tandem, the SAVAK informant networks had become so pervasive throughout Iranian society—or at least so pervasive the perception of them—that the voicing of even mild public discontent had grown rare. With this silence, the shah’s enduring delusion of a “Red menace” was joined to a corresponding delusion of a content and uncomplaining people.

But in all these formulations, one man stood apart: Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. In his Iraqi exile, the archconservative cleric had continued his relentless criticisms of the shah and his regime, and did so with a vituperation that even the most senior clerical dissident within Iran could never have braved. Also not forgotten by Khomeini’s followers was the particular incident that had led to his exile. In 1964, the United States had presented Iran with a treaty known as the Status of Forces Agreement that would have provided legal immunity to all American servicemen stationed in Iran. Despite the treaty raising the ire of Iranian nationalists, the shah had been fully prepared to approve the measure until Khomeini publicly denounced it as yet another craven sellout to foreign powers, another humiliating concession by “the American shah” as he returned Iran to the debasement of the Great Game era. In hindsight, Khomeini in 1964 had been the seer warning of the very kind of Western encroachment that, a decade later, was seeping into almost every aspect of Iranian society. And of course, having been outside Iran for all those interim years, the ayatollah had escaped the patronage system that had seduced so many of his clerical brethren. Instead, in the eyes of many he remained immovable and pure, an uncompromising figure seeking to restore a blessed land turned squalid.

With all this taken together, it meant that by the mid-1970s the shah was steadily maneuvering himself into a trap, a potentially fatal snare common to autocrats everywhere.

First, as his security forces were becoming more repressive, so his opposition was going deeper underground. To combat this required greater surveillance, greater repression, which pushed the most militant opposition even further out of view. Taken to its extreme, the most tyrannical ruler with the most extensive secret police agency ends up having the least sense of what is actually happening in his society. The shah of Iran was hardly the most despotic ruler in the region in the mid-1970s, but by then he probably had a lesser grasp on the concerns of the average Iranian than any taxi driver or street-corner merchant across the breadth of his kingdom.

And a trap of an even more intractable nature. Because the autocrat is father of all things, because he insists on taking credit for all good—the land title bestowed, the highway built—so he will also be blamed for all that goes wrong. If in his own mind the shah stood at the threshold of delivering his Great Civilization to his grateful subjects, those subjects also faulted him for the hyperinflation, the failing electricity, the swaggering bullyboys who ran the local city hall. In the personality cult he had fostered, the King of Kings owned Iran’s potholes.

Of the royal couple, it was the shahbanou who first sensed something seriously amiss. It happened at the shrine of Reza Shah, her deceased father-in-law, in central Tehran on the morning of December 15, 1975, the fiftieth anniversary of the founding of the Pahlavi dynasty. In commemoration of the event, a grand ceremony was arranged, with tens of thousands of Iranians from all walks of life—industrial workers, schoolchildren, tribal elders in ceremonial dress—bused in from across the kingdom to take part. Even though being invited to such an august gathering was considered a great honor, the queen, keenly attuned to the mood of crowds, sensed something off. In her memoir, she described the feeling as akin to “a sudden icy wind.”

Asked to elaborate nearly half a century later, the former empress searched for words. “It’s hard to pinpoint,” she said finally, “but something was definitely different. I felt it immediately. The crowd was much quieter than normal, subdued. The people were always very warm toward me, but that morning I had the feeling they didn’t really want to be there.”

A few weeks after that ceremony, but still troubled by the mood she’d sensed, Farah suggested to her husband that perhaps the Iranian people “are getting fed up with us.” Asadollah Alam was standing nearby when the queen made this comment, close enough to see the shah dismiss it with a grimace and a disdainful flip of the hand.

But the darkening national mood wasn’t Farah’s imagination. By the time of the ceremony at Reza Shah’s shrine, Iran’s bursting-at-the-seams quality was giving over to paralysis. The electrical blackouts, once sporadic and of short duration, had become almost daily occurrences and stretched to hours at a time. The continuing flood of food imports had by now thoroughly gutted the rural agricultural base, driving even more young men into Iran’s teeming urban ghettos. Simultaneously, the state was being schooled on a couple of basic economic laws, specifically that in a globally interconnected economy neither recession nor inflation can be confined. In the West, the oil shocks of 1973 and 1974 had triggered both an economic downturn and a conservation movement, sharply reducing the demand for Middle Eastern oil. At the same time, the spike in oil prices had triggered a knock-on inflationary effect on almost every other product or commodity the world produced, so Iran was now paying markedly more for everything from a Chieftain tank to a bag of imported rice. So hard was the economic brake applied that by the early summer of 1976 the Iranian government was compelled to take out the first in a series of massive international loans.

Still, the shah’s response was petulance and denial. All would be sorted out, he seemed to believe, if only he could push oil prices even higher, something he attempted at every OPEC conference. And no matter the short-term credit squeeze, there remained a world-class army to be built. After a visit from Henry Kissinger in August 1976, the shah announced he was ordering three hundred more F-16s and two hundred more F-18s, never mind that Iran now had neither the money nor the pilots for the ones already in the pipeline. When Asadollah Alam warned of food shortages in the countryside, the shah insisted there were no shortages, only hoarding by greedy businessmen. When Alam pointed out that hoarding depended on shortages, the shah fell into a silent rage. That October, the monarch told his subjects that the best way out of any economic difficulties they might currently be facing was simply to stop complaining and work harder.

Curiously, the King of Kings seemed far more responsive—even proactive—to currents gaining strength beyond Iran’s borders. This was especially true of events in the United States.

With Gerald Ford assuming the presidency after Nixon’s resignation in August 1974, U.S.-Iranian relations had reached a new inflection point. On one level, much continued as before—Ford retained Kissinger as secretary of state and Helms as his ambassador to Iran—and while the new president’s national security team was aghast to learn of the 1972 arms compact with the shah, they also adjudged it to be a fait accompli to be worked around. On another level, though, and very much unlike his predecessor, Ford was determined to forcefully counter any move by the shah to again jack up oil prices, to ensure that the building of his Great Civilization and world-class army didn’t come at the price of the global economy.

Another change was that the shah’s stock had fallen mightily in the eyes of the American public. The main cause was his leadership role in raising oil prices, but other factors added to it. In the wake of the Vietnam fiasco and the Watergate scandal, the United States had embarked on a kind of national soul-searching over its government’s recent history of ugly excesses, both at home and abroad. This had reached a crescendo in 1975 when a Senate investigative body known as the Church Committee held a series of hearings into the misdeeds of the CIA over the decades, a litany that included the assassination of foreign leaders and the overthrow of democratic governments. Coming in for special attention was the CIA’s role in the 1953 coup that restored the shah to power. For a great many Americans, especially liberals, the mid-1970s had become a period in which the misdeeds of American-allied dictators like the shah and Ferdinand Marcos of the Philippines were to be exposed and excoriated even more severely than those of their Soviet-allied counterparts, if only because the United States should strive for something better. For less idealistic Americans, that a close ally should willfully inflict such economic misery on the United States as the shah had done with his oil price hikes and then brag about it seemed the height of ingratitude. Regardless of political persuasion, to the degree that an American had any opinion of the shah, it was now almost certain to be negative.

And then there were the Iranian students. In a classic case of unintended consequences, many of the tens of thousands of Iranian students sent to study in the United States and Europe, and inevitably exposed to Western notions of democratic rule and human rights, had become a noisy vanguard of political opposition to the shah. In European capitals and on American college campuses, the image of Iranian students protesting against the king and his secret police was a common sight by the mid-1970s. Coinciding with this, Western media coverage of Iran, once tending to the patronizing sand-dunes-and-camels variety, increasingly turned to exposés on the kingdom’s culture of corruption, to horror stories about the sadism of SAVAK and the purportedly huge numbers of political prisoners in the shah’s dungeons. These denunciations were further reinforced by reports from human rights groups like Amnesty International, which in its oft-cited 1974– 75 annual report pegged the number of such prisoners languishing in Iranian cells as “anything from 25,000 to 100,000,” when the actual number was probably more in the three to four thousand range.

In contrast to his seeming indifference to domestic dissatisfactions, by 1976 the shah was moving with comparative haste to answer these foreign criticisms. Undoubtedly contributing to his responsiveness was the rise of a most unusual American politician, a former governor of Georgia named Jimmy Carter. Personifying the reformist mood of a large portion of the American electorate, the unknown Carter went from an asterisk in the presidential polls to winning the Democratic presidential nomination that summer, largely on the promise of restoring an element of morality to American leadership. In the foreign sphere, that meant bringing a new focus on human rights around the world and radically reducing American arms sales, two issues that seemed to all but target the King of Kings. With polls through the autumn of 1976 showing Carter headed for a landslide victory over Ford—the actual vote that November proved much closer—the shah scrambled to enact reforms. In a series of candid interviews with Western journalists, he acknowledged human rights abuses in Iran’s prisons, even while insisting he knew nothing about them, and vowed to bring them to an end. He met with representatives of human rights organizations, including Amnesty International, to discuss what other steps could be taken to improve the kingdom’s international standing. Perhaps most remarkably, less than two years after proudly proclaiming the formation of his one-party state under the Rastakhiz banner, the shah was already talking of widening the political aperture to bring in moderate opposition.

But given that he remained an autocrat, the shah might have imperfectly understood a key feature of his chief ally: namely that, in contrast to his own absolute control over every aspect of governance, the American state was a vast sprawling thing, with different agencies frequently competing against—even working at cross-purposes with—one another. Consequently, he probably never suspected that even as some branches of the American government continued to pay obeisance at his feet—the State Department remained particularly shameless in this regard—he was about to be blindsided by another. Even less might he have imagined that this blow would come not from the preachy Jimmy Carter but from a lame-duck Gerald Ford.

Ford’s point man in carrying out this coup was his secretary of the Treasury, William Simon, working in concert with that other Middle Eastern “pillar” of the Nixon Doctrine, Saudi Arabia. With their small population and vastly greater oil reserves, the Saudis had always been far more cautious than Iran about oil prices, concerned that raising them too high or too fast might trigger a global depression. They were also growing steadily more fearful of the massive military the shah was building thanks to past price hikes, concerns that Secretary Simon did everything to stoke. As a result, throughout Ford’s brief, two-and-a-half-year presidency, OPEC meetings were high-stakes contests of brinkmanship, with Iran and other price hawks demanding large markups and moderates like Saudi Arabia arguing for little or no change. A compromise was usually hashed out, but a certain line was crossed in the summer of 1976 when, in response to the shah’s demand for another 15 percent increase, the resisting Saudis threatened to simply flood the world market with oil, a move that would swiftly negate any increase at all. That scenario was averted when the shah backed down, but it set the stage for a new fight at the next OPEC meeting, to be held in Qatar at the end of December 1976, just three weeks before Ford was to leave office. Working behind the scenes on the eve of that meeting, Simon persuaded the Saudis to carry through with their threat if the shah and the other hawks again demanded too much.

In Qatar, the shah and his fellow militants initially appeared to win, taking advantage of a Saudi walkout from the conference to ram through an agreement for an immediate 10 percent price hike, to be followed by another of 5 percent in six months. But the Saudis weren’t out of the game. The following day, they publicly announced they would agree to only a very modest rise, and if others didn’t fall in line, they would unilaterally ramp up production and swamp the world market. Instead of merely nullifying the price hike, this countermove sent oil prices tumbling.

“The blasted Saudis have betrayed both us and themselves,” the shah thundered to Asadollah Alam upon hearing the news from Qatar on New Year’s Day 1977. He was in an even worse mood the following day when he’d had a chance to run some numbers. “We’re broke,” he told Alam. “Everything seems doomed to grind to a standstill.”

The minister of court tried desperately to buoy the king’s spirits. “I replied that this is by no means the first time we have been faced with a setback,” Alam recounted in his diary, “and that he is bound to overcome this one as he has all the others.”

But Alam’s cheerleading notwithstanding, the shah’s grim predictions proved prescient. With the world suddenly awash in much cheaper oil, the Iranian economy shuddered to a crawl virtually overnight, with oil production that January plummeting by a shattering 38 percent over the previous month. Within just a few more weeks, foreign companies in Iran were complaining of not getting paid, and construction projects all across the country were being shut down, causing unemployment to soar. With a speed even greater than with which it had come, the Iranian gold rush was over. In the future, many would attribute the coming revolution, now just a year away, to the economic downturn that, having stalked Iran for some time, struck with full and devastating force with the Saudi oil coup in Qatar.

It was a turning point that America’s envoys in Iran were in no hurry to grasp, as Michael Metrinko discovered when he returned to Tehran that winter.

* * *

After his Peace Corps tour in Iran closed out in the summer of 1973, Metrinko had briefly stood at a professional crossroads. “After my experiences abroad, I couldn’t see just settling back into some normal life in the States,” he explained. “I wanted to go back overseas—but maybe get paid for it this time.”

Passing the State Department’s foreign service exam, Metrinko did tours as a consular officer at the embassies in Syria and Turkey before an opening came up in Iran. When he returned to Tehran in March 1977 as a visa officer, he had been gone for nearly four years.

Like almost everyone else who’d been away from the Iranian capital for a time, Metrinko was stunned by the changes that had occurred in his absence: the new buildings, the new consumer culture and of course the paralyzing traffic. This was a major topic of conversation in Tehran, and time and again Metrinko was told it was now faster to walk between any two points in the sprawling city than to drive, an observation that experience bore out.

Once he took up his post at the consulate, the branch of the embassy that issued visas, Metrinko swiftly came face-to-face with the underside of the “Iran miracle.” Occupying its own building two blocks from the embassy campus, the consulate had always been an extremely busy place, but by the spring of 1977 it was absolutely overrun, with lines of prospective applicants often stretching for two or three blocks, and some people queuing up on evenings to ensure reaching the front doors by the following day. To obtain a visa to visit the U.S., applicants had to supply stacks of paperwork to prove their intention of returning to Iran—bank statements, letters from their employers—but as a fluent Farsi speaker, Metrinko began hearing a different story during his interviews. “They were moving their money out,” he said. “I would very innocently ask, ‘So how much money have you transferred into your American bank account?’ and they’d say, ‘One million, five million, everything I have.’ And these were people from the ruling circle—industrialists, generals, you name it.”

Metrinko was especially amused when, on several occasions, CIA officers took him aside to ask if he could move the visa applications of some of their more valuable assets to the top of the pile. “Excuse me, Mr. Intelligence Officer,” Metrinko said, laughing, “but what does it tell you when your most important sources are trying to get the hell out of the country?”

Initially, the new visa officer attributed much of this rush to the economic jolt that had so recently taken hold: Iranians had always traveled abroad, the wealthy had always maintained second homes there and the capitalist class had always been adept at moving their money to where it might retain its value. One applicant in particular caused Metrinko to rethink this view.

“He was a very wealthy art collector with a fabulous collection,” Metrinko recalled. “In fact, his collection was so exquisite that the shah’s wife often arranged for important foreign visitors to go to his home to view it.”

Given the shahbanou’s keen interest in art and the network of museums she was establishing across the country, it seemed only a matter of time before the aristocrat’s collection ended up in a state institution. When the man appeared before Metrinko that spring, however, he confided that he was looking to spirit his artworks out of the country and then follow them himself. When asked why, he simply shrugged and said, “Because this place is about to explode.”

Shortly after, Metrinko renewed the acquaintance of a friend he had known from his earlier days in Iran whose roommate was an officer in the shah’s personal bodyguard. Naturally, such a position of honor was reserved for only the most elite and loyal of soldiers, but over a long evening of conversation the officer vented his disgust with the king and his venal inner circle. “I wouldn’t shoot him myself,” the soldier said, “but I certainly wouldn’t stop anyone else from doing it.”

Again, the consular officer was struck by the depth of disaffection with the regime, the fact that it had taken hold even among its most privileged and trusted members.

And there was a sad story as well. As his frenetic work schedule allowed, Metrinko took to tracking down some of his favorite students from his days at the Mamezan teaching college. He was especially eager to locate Shala, a brilliant young woman who had been outspoken on the need for a political opening in Iran and who had provoked the ire of SAVAK. In his inquiries, Metrinko was told by Shala’s family and friends that she had gone abroad for graduate studies, but he grew suspicious when no one could provide him with a mailing address. Finally, the persistent embassy officer learned the truth: Shala had been “disappeared”—murdered—by SAVAK, but the safety of her family and friends demanded that no one speak the truth. “Well, that’s how it worked,” Metrinko said. “People were picked up by SAVAK and disappeared, and that was it. No one wanted to be associated with the missing.”

Although new to the American legation, Metrinko was acutely aware that such dismal accounts ran counter to the sunny story the embassy’s leadership wished to promote to both Washington and the outside world. In the summer of 1977, this included a new ambassador, a career foreign service officer named William Sullivan, but until he got his bearings—Sullivan had only presented his credentials to the shah in mid-June—the real driver of embassy policy was its deputy chief of mission (DCM), Jack Miklos. This was the same Jack Miklos who, as Iran desk director five years earlier, had insisted to Henry Precht that there were no books on Iran worth reading and who had earned a reputation in American foreign policy circles as the shah’s most ardent cheerleader. In his first few months at the embassy, Metrinko had already clashed with Miklos on several occasions, enough to know that airing any accounts from the darker side of Iranian life would be most unwelcome. Nevertheless, the visa officer felt duty-bound to work up reports of his encounters.

A poor typist himself, Metrinko gave his handwritten notes to the embassy secretarial pool, the first step in a laborious process that would see his reports passed to a string of embassy officials before finally landing on Miklos’s desk. At that point, the DCM would decide whether the reports should be transmitted to Washington via the higher-priority cable system or by the much lower-priority—and rarely read—airgram, or diplomatic pouch. “Considering what I’d said,” Metrinko explained, “and how much it conflicted with the party line, there was absolutely no question but that they were going out as airgrams. Jack Miklos was an idiot, but he wasn’t such an idiot as to let something like that get through.”

Except that due to a mix-up in the paper-trail process, Metrinko’s reports were typed up and cabled to Washington without Miklos’s ever seeing them. Very soon, the ambassador and the DCM and other senior embassy officials were getting calls from State headquarters asking about the startling reports that ran counter to everything they’d been reading out of Iran for months. Almost as quickly, Metrinko was ordered up to Sullivan’s office. “He and Miklos just got right up in my face,” he recalled, “screaming that I had snuck around their backs, that if I ever pulled something like that again, they’d see to it that I was drummed out of the foreign service. The funny thing is, that was actually my introduction to Sullivan, the first time I met him.”

However inadvertently, Metrinko had committed the cardinal sin of bureaucracies everywhere: He hadn’t stayed in his lane. But he had done far worse. The shah’s Iran was now of such vital importance to the United States that to even suggest it was in trouble was unimaginable; with his reports, Metrinko had imagined it.

Which wasn’t to suggest his superiors might actually address the substance of what he’d written. Instead, Miklos put a single question to him, a particularly shocking one under the circumstances: He demanded the name of the disaffected bodyguard in the shah’s entourage. When Metrinko flatly refused—if the man’s identity became known to SAVAK, he would surely have been disappeared the same day—the junior foreign service officer knew that a black mark had been set against him in the embassy hierarchy, one that would take a long time to remove.

At about the same time that Metrinko was being reprimanded and isolated at the embassy, another truth teller, one vastly more powerful, was also falling into eclipse: It was the shah’s closest confidant, Asadollah Alam.

In the early 1970s, Alam had been diagnosed with leukemia, the treatment for which had required periodic hospitalizations both in Europe and in Iran. While these treatments helped control the disease, they didn’t cure it, and by 1977 it was clear to all palace insiders that Alam was in a state of terminal decline. By that summer, he had so weakened that he was airlifted to France for treatment. It was during his convalescence there, in August, that he submitted his resignation as minister of the imperial court.

Seven months prior, on the morning of January 16, 1977, Alam had given the shah a handwritten letter. Whether out of concern for the Iranian economy just then crashing down—it had been only two weeks since the Saudi-led OPEC coup in Qatar—or from an awareness that he didn’t have much longer to live, Alam warned with startling candor of the perilous course the nation was traveling. “How else can I describe the way we ourselves have stirred up the people against us by our own shortcomings?” he wrote to the shah. “Prolonged power-cuts right across the country, occasioning slow-down in industrial output and serious financial losses; dreadful communications; shortages of every essential foodstuff save bread; a total disregard for the public’s needs; soaring inflation; the promulgation of new decrees without any preparation or warning…. It is the government itself which deserves to be regarded as the chief agent of subversion. We have squandered every cent we had only to find ourselves checkmated by a single move from Saudi Arabia.”

Even at that eleventh hour, Alam couldn’t bring himself to blame the shah for any of this. Instead, it was somehow the fault of all those around the king, the sycophants and toadies whom Alam had constantly warned against. “As Your Majesty’s loyal servant,” he wrote, “I urge you to take stern action against the traitors and incompetents who have betrayed us.”

At the letter’s close, and already adopting a vaguely posthumous tone, Alam urged the shah to face the coming financial hardships head-on, arguing that even his ambitions for his cherished army must be scaled back. Only this, Alam concluded, “will restore the position of my beloved Shahanshah to all its former security and majesty.”

But time had changed the King of Kings. Fourteen years earlier, when he was in danger of being swept from office amid the June 1963 riots, he had desperately looked to Alam for answers: “But what shall we do?” Upon reading Alam’s letter of January 1977, the shah tore it up and threw it away. Also thrown away was the warning of a wiser man; by coincidence, it would be two years to the day from that act of hubris, January 16, 1979, that the shah would be cast from Iran, never to return.

In September 1977, with his decline becoming ever more precipitous, Asadollah Alam made a last entry in his diary. “I am proud to have served the Shahanshah faithfully for thirty-seven years,” he wrote. “Never once did I utter a falsehood or consciously mislead him.” He then closed on a poignant note, clearly referencing the advice he had earlier offered but that the king had spurned. “Lately I felt compelled to speak my mind, but it saddened me. It took away my zest for public affairs but not my loyalty to my great, beloved Shahanshah.”

Just six weeks later, the King of Kings took the controls of his imperial Boeing 707 at Mehrabad Airport and lifted the plane into a dull-blue sky. He was bound for the United States and his first meeting with the new American president, Jimmy Carter.

Chapter 6

While the Oval Office gets all the attention, a room just two doors down from the president’s inner sanctum has been the site for possibly even more history-altering gatherings. Its unimaginative name, the Cabinet Room, alludes to its primary function as the one place in the White House where the president can comfortably meet with all his senior advisors and cabinet secretaries—a number now standing at fifteen—but it’s for the same reason that important foreign heads of state and their entourages are often brought there for extended talks. Save those from nations the United States has been at war with, through the doors of the Cabinet Room have passed almost every international political luminary of the past one hundred years, a list that extends from Winston Churchill to Mikhail Gorbachev, from Nelson Mandela to Indira Gandhi, and there they have conversed with presidents on some of the most consequential issues of the modern age. That said, rarely have the stakes been as high as those attending the meeting held there on the morning of November 15, 1977, when President Jimmy Carter and Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, King of Kings, sat across from each other for the first time.

As the two leaders were keenly aware, after thirty-six years the Iranian-American alliance stood at a crucial juncture, and much of its future course would be decided by what transpired between them over the next twenty-four hours. Between the lingering scent of tear gas from one side of the White House and the audible chants of “Death to the shah!” from the thousands of protesters massed on the other, matters were not off to an auspicious start.

With the violent clashes on the Ellipse leading to an abbreviated welcoming ceremony on the South Lawn, the two heads of state and their wives had hastily repaired to the ground-floor reception hall of the White House. After the couples were given a chance to rinse the sting of tear gas from their eyes, the shah and the president stepped into the Cabinet Room, where, joined by their closest advisors, they were to spend the next ninety minutes in their first substantive discussions. Indicative of the difference in their nations’ governing dynamics, Carter was joined by six senior administration officials, including the vice president and secretary of state. On the opposite side of the mahogany table, the shah was flanked by just two aides.

Of the ten men in the Cabinet Room, by far the most modestly credentialed was the forty-two-year-old navy captain Gary Sick. Living today in New York City, where he is a professor of international affairs at Columbia University, in 1977 Sick had spent the previous two years as a staff member of the National Security Council, the president’s chief consultative body on foreign policy matters, and was regarded at the White House as its chief Iran expert. “Which was quite a stretch,” Sick recalled with a chuckle, “considering I’d spent a total of about three days there.”

A career naval officer, Sick had made his sole visit to Iran years earlier when he’d accompanied an American admiral on an inspection of a naval base on the Persian Gulf, followed by a brief layover in Tehran to visit a cousin working in the oil industry. In 1975, during the Ford administration, he’d accepted an assignment to the National Security Council to work on disarmament and Arabian Peninsula issues, with plans to take an early retirement from the military after the 1976 presidential elections and turn to teaching. “New administrations usually clean house at the NSC and bring in all their own people,” Sick explained. “So when Carter got elected, I figured I’d just get sent back to Defense to reach my twenty years [retirement threshold] and that would be it.”

Instead, whether born of recognition of Sick’s expertise or simple bureaucratic inertia—the modest Sick tends to favor the latter explanation—the new administration kept him on. While today it has billowed to many times the size, the NSC staff in 1977 consisted of a mere forty or so advisors, so Sick and one other staffer, Bill Quandt, divvied up the entire Middle East and extended Arab world between them. “In addition to the Arab/Israeli issue, Bill had North Africa clear across to Morocco, while I had the Arabian Gulf and Indian Ocean disarmament issues,” Sick said. “Early on, we joked about how disproportionate our workloads were, that Bill would never be able to rest while I was on easy street. Well, that’s not how it turned out.”

Not at all. The designated notetaker at that November 15 meeting in the Cabinet Room, Gary Sick was about to find the next three years of his life utterly consumed by events in Iran, first by the revolution against the shah and then by the American embassy hostage crisis. In the process, he was to have an extraordinary front-row seat to some of the most momentous—and traumatic—events in modern American history.

Sick’s first close-up glimpse of the shah had come on the South Lawn, when he had stood just below the rostrum from which the two heads of state spoke. “But I can’t say I really absorbed that much,” he recalled, “distracted as I was by the tear gas.” Instead, it wasn’t until the Cabinet Room, with Sick taking a seat at one end of the long conference table, away from the principals, that he was able to closely observe the King of Kings. Along with a certain delicate manner, he was struck by the shah’s air of formality. “This was definitely not a backslapping kind of guy. He carried himself with a sense of gravitas—you could even call it an imperiousness—that was immediately apparent.”

Carter and his senior aides had been warned as much in the detailed briefing book the State Department had prepared for the meeting. “The Shah tends to be stiff and formal and does not easily unbend his imperial demeanor,” the report warned, “very much the serious head of state who is quick to sense slight, condescension or over-familiarity.” That said, the State Department analysts chose to indulge in a bit of condescension of their own, noting that the shah’s “air of self-confidence—some would say arrogance—covers a continuing sense of insecurity which is in part simply a Persian cultural trait.”

With Carter put on notice to tread with great care, it was a revealing insight into his personality, as well as his talent for swiftly forming personal bonds with others, that in the Cabinet Room he chose to do almost the precise opposite.

Just nine days earlier, in the early morning hours of Sunday, November 6, an earthen dam holding back the waters of Toccoa Creek in northern Georgia had abruptly collapsed. The resulting wall of water had swept over the campus of a small Bible college downstream with such speed and force that many of its sleeping residents had no chance to escape. By the time rescue efforts ended, searchers had pulled thirty-nine bodies from the creek bed.

When a nation experiences a tragedy such as had occurred at Toccoa Creek, friendly foreign governments often send messages of condolence to the affected head of state. While these messages are sent under the signature of the foreign leader, it is widely understood that only the most cataclysmic of such tragedies are likely to draw that leader’s actual personal notice, and, sad to say, the thirty-nine dead at Toccoa Creek came nowhere near approaching that threshold. Nevertheless, in its wake the protocol office of the Iranian imperial court had sent a letter of condolence to President Carter under the shah’s signature, and in the Cabinet Room it was to this letter that Carter turned in his opening remarks, thanking the shah for his thoughtfulness and saying how much the note had meant to him personally. From the mouth of another man such disingenuousness might have seemed unctuous, even tilting toward the very condescension Carter had been warned against, but coming from him, the words sounded heartfelt. That was how the shah, who until that moment had surely never heard of Toccoa Creek, interpreted them, leaving him disarmed. They also set the meeting off to a promising start.

Which was probably a very good thing considering the host of things the shah was apprehensive about. In fact, probably more than any other sentiment, it was insecurity over his standing with the new American president that had compelled him to Washington.

Beginning in late 1975 and accelerating through 1976, the monarch had watched Jimmy Carter’s unlikely march to the White House with a mixture of disbelief and dread. With his talk of promoting “social progress” abroad, the former Georgia governor unpleasantly reminded the shah of his least favorite American president, John Kennedy, and he had openly fretted over what his ascension might portend. At least initially, the shah’s worries seemed validated. As in other police-state nations around the globe, the new American president’s emphasis on human rights had emboldened the Iranian opposition. Over the course of 1977, there had been an increasing number of university campus protests demanding greater democratization, even as conservative clerics grew louder in their condemnation of the nation’s pace of modernization. The dissent had intensified as the shah’s journey to Washington drew nearer. Clearly meant to embarrass him, college students all across Iran staged protests the weekend before the royal couple’s departure, while in a highly publicized move a group of fifty-four prominent liberals signed an open letter calling for democratic elections and the abolition of the SAVAK secret police.

If irritating, all this was eminently manageable. What continued to alarm the Iranian leader was what he saw as a fusion of indifference and incompetence emanating from the new American administration.

Upon Carter’s election victory, the shah had sent a customary note of congratulations and then waited two months for an acknowledgment, one accompanied by the scarcely credible excuse that his note had somehow been misplaced. What defied excuse was the slowness with which the new administration had named an ambassador to the Peacock Throne. In keeping with tradition, Gerald Ford’s ambassador, Richard Helms, had tendered his resignation immediately after the November 1976 elections, but it then took Carter five months to select his replacement, the career diplomat William Sullivan, and then another two months to shepherd Sullivan’s nomination through Congress. Was this a deliberate snub or a sign that the new administration didn’t know what it was doing?

But the contentious struggle over Sullivan’s confirmation underscored an even more fundamental question in the shah’s mind: Just who held the reins of power in 1977 Washington, the new president or the U.S. Congress?

Carter had campaigned as the ultimate outsider, and thus far his tenure in Washington, where he was constantly being assailed by both liberals and conservatives, certainly bore this out. In the wake of the Watergate scandal of 1972–74, reformist-minded Democrats had attained large majorities in the House and Senate and set out to both investigate past excesses of government agencies and wrest back many of the powers that had been assumed—and abused—by the executive branch under Nixon. One result was the Church Committee hearings in 1975 that led to a public airing of the CIA’s role in ousting Mohammad Mossadegh and restoring the shah to power in 1953. Another was a new law giving Congress increased oversight and potential veto power over all major foreign arms sales, along with a new certification process whereby foreign regimes were to face annual State Department reviews of their progress, or lack thereof, on human rights. On the surface, all this dovetailed nicely with Carter’s oft-repeated pledges on the campaign trail to promote democratic reform and reduce American arms sales abroad, but the reality was that the president now faced a crusader bloc within Congress that meant to hold him to those pledges, while at the other end of the political spectrum conservatives and Republicans were quite happy to watch him flounder.

All this had come to a boil just that summer over the shah’s torturous effort to obtain a new strategic defense structure from the Americans known as the Airborne Warning and Control System, or AWACS for short. Intended as a revolutionary aircraft-based early warning system, AWACS had gone into development under intense secrecy in the early 1970s and shown such promise in prototype that in 1974 the shah had put in an advance purchase order for nine of the highly specialized planes. Not a problem under the no-questions-asked arms sales policy of the Nixon and Ford administrations, but a very big problem when it came to a dovish American president and an even more dovish Congress in 1977. Eager not to alienate the shah completely, Carter had unilaterally sliced the proposed Iranian buy to five planes, before settling on the compromise number of seven. That turned out to be seven more than the U.S. Senate was prepared to approve. With the proposed sale under attack from both doves and hawks in Congress, the administration had hastily withdrawn their bid, then worked furiously behind the scenes to find the votes for eventual passage. They finally did so in early September 1977, just two months before the shah’s arrival in Washington, but only after forcing from the Iranian monarch a humiliating series of concessions. These included removing from the Iranian AWACS planes much of the advanced avionics that had made the system attractive in the first place. Given these experiences, it was perfectly understandable why the shah might harbor serious doubts about his status with the new American president and seek the first opportunity to sit across from him and take his measure.

But what the King of Kings didn’t realize until that morning in November—at least not sufficiently—was that Jimmy Carter had long since decided on the course his administration intended to take in Iran. His image as a moralizing crusader notwithstanding, the former governor was an extremely astute politician who wasn’t about to let campaign promises get in the way of his operating in the real world. In sum, if he didn’t need a briefing book to guide him on dealing with the shah, he also didn’t need one to tell him how profoundly important both the Iranian king and his nation were to the security and future vitality of the United States.

Iran was now the third-largest exporter of oil to the United States, and the only major Gulf producer not to have joined the ruinous oil embargo against the West in 1973. Along with serving as the policeman of the Persian Gulf, the Iranian military, now the world’s fifth largest, was quietly doing the United States’ bidding in such disparate and far-flung corners of the world as Yemen, Somalia and Chad. Iran purchased some $10 billion worth of American goods per year and was now home to some fifty thousand Americans: military advisors, bankers, businessmen, together with their families. This made Iran home to the largest American expatriate community between Western Europe and East Asia, just as the estimated fifty thousand Iranians attending American universities made them by far the largest foreign student community in the United States. By any conceivable metric—economic, political, cultural, militarily—Iran was now one of the most critically important American allies on the planet.

Undergirding all this was the compact that Nixon and Kissinger had formed with the shah in 1972. One reason diplomatic overtures between nations normally advance in small steps is that a concession, once granted, is almost impossible to withdraw or scale back without giving offense. More than a step, the 1972 Nixon-Kissinger concord had been a massive leap forward, one virtually without parallel in American foreign policy, and in tandem with the shah’s innate insecurity, his acute ability to perceive American slights in the smallest of gestures, there was simply no way Jimmy Carter could downsize the Iranian-American alliance even if he wanted to.

And he most surely did not want to. While not yet fully revealed to the larger world, Carter was nurturing one of the most extraordinarily ambitious arrays of foreign policy initiatives of any president in history. In addition to ceding control of the Panama Canal to the Panamanian government, a treaty signed just two months before the shah’s visit to Washington, Carter was quietly seeking to establish full diplomatic relations with mainland China, to enter into a sweeping arms reduction pact with the Soviet Union and, picking up where Nixon and Kissinger had failed, to forge a comprehensive Middle East peace settlement between Israel and its Arab neighbors. With each one of these approaching initiatives, and with a host of others of a more regional focus, the president was counting on the shah’s approval and assistance.

And then there was the matter of oil. Carter, like President Ford before him, lived in mortal fear of another oil price hike by OPEC nations that might send the American and international economies into another recessionary tailspin. With the shah one of the most persistent price hike advocates within OPEC, Carter envoys had spent recent months pleading with their Iranian counterparts not to push for another increase at the upcoming OPEC conference in December. That decision ultimately rested with the King of Kings, of course.

For all these reasons, Carter had been earnestly trying for some time to telegraph to the Iranian leader that there would be no fundamental change in ties between their two nations, that their “special relationship” would continue. Given the slights and snafus he had been forced to endure, however, it was understandable that the shah wanted to hear this for himself.

The end result was a euphemistic quality to much of the conversation between the two heads of state in the Cabinet Room that morning, discourse that required a certain reading between the lines. To avoid being seen as bowing to American demands, the shah allowed that a general concern over the health of the global economy had led him to decide to seek no price increase at the upcoming OPEC conference, a pledge he’d made publicly just before coming to Washington and now repeated. In a similar vein, he stressed that despite the recent actions of agitators seeking to take advantage, there would be no curtailing of his government’s commitment to a more inclusive political environment, code for human rights. For his part, Carter let it be known that when it came to Iran’s staggering military shopping list, a list so vast and costly it threatened to make a mockery of his campaign pledge to limit arms sales, it was time for senior officials in both governments to set to the task of fashioning work-arounds. One bit of creative accounting already in the works was to have the Iranians devise five-year purchasing plans rather than their usual one-year plans so that costs could be pre- or postdated as budgetary opportunities—or congressional and media inattention—permitted. As for the rather more ticklish matter of human rights violations, Carter actually failed to raise the matter at all that morning; when the issue did briefly come up at a later meeting, the president let it be known that rather than harp on any potential shortcomings, his administration intended to focus on the great and heartening strides the Iranian regime was making in this sphere.

Throughout the ninety-minute meeting, and even as he tried to stay abreast of his note-taking, Gary Sick was struck by the marked difference in dynamics between the two delegations.

“I wouldn’t say Carter was loose, exactly,” he recalled, “but he had this core informality about him. If he didn’t know the answer to something, he’d just lean over and ask whoever did; he had no ego about that. On the shah’s side of the table, the two guys with him might as well have been statues for as much as they joined in. The shah had thought everything through beforehand, he knew exactly what he wanted to say and there was nothing spontaneous about it.”

Over the next thirty hours, right up until the Iranian delegation left Washington at 6:00 p.m. on November 16, the King of Kings maintained a schedule of meetings and receptions and press briefings that would have tested the endurance and mental stamina of someone half his age. Gary Sick was in the shah’s company for much of that time and became steadily more amazed by the monarch’s extraordinary focus and retention of detail. That reached new heights on the morning of November 16, at another gathering in the White House Cabinet Room. The attendees were the same ten men as on the previous day, but much of this second ninety-minute session was taken up with military matters, a comprehensive run-through of the various weapons systems the shah wished to purchase, their specifications and prospective delivery dates.

“And his grasp on all that was absolutely encyclopedic,” Sick recalled. “He knew the ins and outs of these different systems—and some of this stuff was extremely technical—how each performed in different scenarios, you name it, he knew it all. It was really remarkable.” On the strength of such performances, Sick concluded that the shah was “without a doubt one of the most impressive foreign leaders I ever came into contact with.”

For his part, the king was little short of ecstatic at the results of his Washington sojourn. To one intimate, he opined that it was probably the most important and successful of any visit he had made to Washington over the previous twenty-five years. “He was just beaming,” recalled a State Department official who met with him on the evening of November 15. “He was absolutely delighted.” Carter and his senior officials emerged just as pleased.

But in addition to the tangible results that derived from it—Carter’s tacit pledge to soft-pedal Iran’s human rights record and to utilize creative accounting in supplying it with weapons; the shah’s pledge to hold the line on oil prices—the November meeting achieved something few might have imagined beforehand: a genuine rapport between the two heads of state, not just a convergence of geopolitical interests and goals but a strong personal connection. Despite the profound differences in their personalities—one so formal and stiff-backed as to invite comparison to a windup toy soldier, the other whose languorous speech and posture fairly exuded unpretentiousness—the two men appeared to truly like each other. This budding friendship went on display on the evening of November 15, at the start of the official state dinner for the shah and shahbanou at the White House. With a reputation for witty and extemporaneous toasts, and in acknowledgment of the violent demonstrations that had swept Washington that day, Carter raised a glass of champagne in the shah’s direction and deadpanned, “There’s one thing I can say about the shah: he knows how to draw a crowd.” The guests roared with laughter, with the King of Kings, that most serious and self-important of men, heartily joining in.

But the resounding success that the two leaders saw was not at all the view shared by their respective countrymen. To the degree the average American had any awareness of the conclave in Washington, it derived from what they saw on their television’s nightly newscast or their newspaper’s front page, and these were images of stave-wielding protesters rioting in the streets, of the two heads of state being teargassed on the South Lawn. These were images not of triumph but of embarrassment and chaos.

The Iranian reaction to those images was even more negative—and vastly more profound. For generations, Iranians had perceived their nation as the pawn of larger powers. Over the previous thirty-six years, the King of Kings had frequently employed this conspiracist mindset to his own benefit, tarring his opponents with the accusation that they were in the secret service of the Soviets or the British or even, at times, the Americans. So pronounced was this perception, and so deeply held, that by the 1970s, as Gary Sick joked, “a sparrow couldn’t fall from an Iranian tree, but that the CIA killed it.”

But having prospered for so long by peddling this narrative, the shah would now suffer its consequences. To a great many Iranians, and perhaps especially to those who saw the hidden hand of the United States in all things, the violence accompanying his arrival in Washington—and in a particularly unfortunate move, someone at Iran’s national television station had decided the White House welcoming ceremony should be broadcast live—could only mean the shah had fallen from American favor, that the new president was seeking his demise. How else to possibly explain his humiliation on the White House lawn, the impunity with which his enemies were allowed to rage? If Carter’s talk of promoting human rights abroad had helped stir antigovernment protests in Iran prior to November 1977, the images from that meeting helped give them new vigor. In the days after the shah’s return from Washington, and even as the state-run media touted the great success of his journey, an increasing number of protests—still small, still easily squelched—began occurring all across Iran.

As those disturbances proliferated and grew more violent in the months ahead, Gary Sick would have reason to recall a small moment of dissonance during the royal visit. It happened at the state dinner for the shah and shahbanou on the evening of November 15.

Knowing the monarch was a jazz enthusiast, Carter had arranged for two living legends of the jazz world, Dizzy Gillespie and Sarah Vaughan, to perform at the conclusion of the formal dinner. Seeming to forget that these events tended to be sedate affairs, the two musicians broke into a spirited riff, Vaughan extemporaneously harmonizing off Gillespie’s trumpet, that went on for several minutes. “It just brought the house down,” Sick recalled, “and when it was over, Carter jumped to his feet and went up and embraced Gillespie, hugged Vaughan.”

As the president was congratulating the musicians, the NSC officer happened to glance over at the shah. He remained in his chair, frozen. “It was this wonderful, unscripted moment,” Sick said, “one that really kind of resonated with everyone, and the shah simply didn’t know what to do. And his wife is pulling on his arm, you know, ‘Get up there, do something,’ and so finally he gets up and goes over and just very awkwardly shakes their hands. To me, it really said something about him, that underneath it all, he was just this very shy, ill-at-ease guy.”

Of course, it also spoke of someone who didn’t like surprises, who might perform brilliantly from prepared scripts in conference rooms but was apt to be confounded by spontaneity. “I didn’t realize the import of all that at the time,” Sick explained, “but it’s something I was to think back on very often over that next year.”

* * *

If the King of Kings developed a quick personal rapport with Jimmy Carter, not so his wife. At her home outside Washington, D.C., Farah Pahlavi grew thoughtful, pensive, in remembering her reaction to the president. “I’m not exactly sure why,” she said at last, “but I never trusted him. From the moment I first met him, there was something in his manner that put me on guard. I think he was a much more calculating person than the image he put forward.”

Part of it might have stemmed from a streak of what today would be considered sexist condescension on Carter’s part. He and the shahbanou actually first met in the summer of 1977, several months before the shah’s state visit to Washington, when amid a cultural goodwill tour of the United States the queen had a brief meet and greet with the new president at the White House. “And the first thing he said to me was, ‘I had no idea you were so beautiful,’ ” Pahlavi recalled with an annoyed shake of her head. “That was all he would talk about.”

Carter’s patronizing attitude had continued during the royal couple’s visit to Washington. During his long-winded toast at the state dinner on November 15, the president had extolled the shah for his courage and “great leadership” while describing Farah as “perhaps one of the most beautiful leaders in the world.” At the dinner, Farah was seated next to Lew Wasserman, the president of the MCA Entertainment Group, and to the bemusement of his audience Carter spun a tale that had Wasserman trying to persuade the shahbanou to star in one of his movies. “I promised that if he made a film,” the president concluded to gales of laughter, “I’d be the first one to buy a ticket to see her.”

Pahlavi politely joined in the joke but seethed inside. “I was an educated, professional woman,” she said, still stung nearly fifty years later. “I didn’t deserve to be regarded that way.”

And there was more. From a corner of her living room, Pahlavi retrieved an oversized silver-inlaid folio box and set it on a coffee table. Inside was a large leather-bound guest book in which visitors to her Niavaran Palace home over the years had penned personal messages. For several minutes, she flipped through the notes left by kings and presidents and artists, until she found the one she was looking for. It was from Rosalynn and Jimmy Carter, dated New Year’s Day 1978, but even by the low standards typical of such guest-book messages, theirs was particularly banal and brief: “Thank you for all your wonderful hospitality. Happy New Year.”

Given the extraordinary planning required, it is highly unusual for an American president to receive or visit the same foreign head of state more than once every year or two. Save for a major international crisis, it’s virtually unheard of that they should meet twice in a matter of months. In this respect, the mere six weeks separating the shah’s visit to Washington in November 1977 and President Carter’s arrival in Tehran on New Year’s Eve was utterly unique.

The White House offered a simple explanation: Amid an extended foreign tour, the president was on his way between Poland and India, and Tehran made for a convenient midway stopover. The true reason was a good deal more interesting. While it was still being kept rather quiet, Carter was now immersed in his quest for a multination Arab-Israeli peace agreement, and he wished to use the good offices of the shah to push some of the more recalcitrant Arab leaders toward settlement. The Americans were making good progress with the Egyptian president, Anwar Sadat, with whom the shah was very close, but having more difficulty with another of the shah’s close friends, King Hussein of Jordan. The stopover in Tehran was to brief the Iranian monarch on the status of the peace talks, but also to have Hussein fly in so that Carter and the shah might lean on him together. Of course, an added dividend was that such a swift reciprocal visit by the American president would play very well to the shah’s fragile ego, a tangible sign of the great importance Carter was placing on U.S.-Iranian relations.

Despite the brevity of the visit—Air Force One was scheduled to be on the ground at Mehrabad Airport for just seventeen hours—the regime went all out on welcoming the president. Almost every building along the fifteen-mile motorcade route to Niavaran Palace had been given a fresh coat of whitewash, while from nearly every lamppost hung banners extolling U.S.-Iranian friendship. A somewhat eerie note was struck by the city’s emptiness; out of security concerns, the government had closed the route to all spectators, except for a carefully screened group of several thousand who clustered at the Shahyad Monument to wave miniature American and Iranian flags as the limousines whizzed past.

Ensconced in one of those limousines was the National Security Council advisor Gary Sick.

In preparation for the trip, the navy captain had followed the news out of Iran more closely than usual. He’d been slightly alarmed by what he read. Sick knew the shah’s opposition had grown more vocal prior to his Washington visit—there’d been a spate of campus protests, along with that open letter from fifty-four dissidents demanding reform—but the dissension appeared to redouble in its aftermath. By late November, campus protests had spread across Iran, with some leading to pitched battles between students and security forces, and mass arrests. In response, a number of university chancellors had temporarily suspended classes and threatened to shut down their campuses altogether if the trouble didn’t end. Perhaps most worrisome, the new stridency of opposition leaders and students seemed to be finding echo in other segments of society. In early December, bank workers went out on strike in response to the government dragging its feet over a wage increase, while reports filtering in from the countryside told of protest marches in towns and cities previously best known for their political quiescence. It was all quite small-scale, and very little of it was leading to violence, but Gary Sick did ponder whether the acrimony might be cause for concern.

With this thought, the NSC officer was unlikely to get much guidance from the American embassy on Takht-e-Jamshid Avenue, where the new ambassador, William Sullivan, had taken up residence just six months earlier. The silver-haired Sullivan seemed to fairly embody the ambassadorial stereotype—charming, handsome, unflappable—and had already served in some extremely demanding foreign posts: in Laos during the early years of the Vietnam War, then in the Philippines as the dictatorship of Ferdinand Marcos grew increasingly repressive. By Sullivan’s own admission, however, he had come into his Iran assignment woefully unprepared. During his orientation briefings in Washington the previous summer, he had been so appalled by the paucity and quality of CIA and embassy reporting out of Tehran that he’d complained, “I’ve never worked on a country where I had less of a sense of what’s going on.” Once in Iran, Sullivan had tried to remedy the situation by urging embassy officers to broaden their contacts with opposition figures, only to see his outreach effort succumb to the usual combination of bureaucratic torpor and the disapproval of a host government given to fury over such contacts.

And perhaps also succumbed to the ministrations of Sullivan’s No. 2 at the embassy, Deputy Chief of Mission Jack Miklos. Miklos had spent the past four years in Tehran, over the course of which a number of foreign service officers recalled being hectored by the DCM over what he considered their negative reporting, his admonition that they should be spreading “the good news” about the shah’s regime instead. Without access to internal State Department memoranda, Gary Sick had no knowledge of these dissenting voices within the embassy, nor of the most recent kerfuffle between Miklos and Michael Metrinko on the matter. Instead, by controlling the flow of information back to Washington, especially as Ambassador Sullivan acclimated to his new posting, the DCM sent the consistent message that there was nothing to worry about, that those Iranians who opposed the shah were basically out-of-touch whiners.

Typical had been his response to the open letter of the fifty-four prominent dissidents in November calling for an end to the dictatorship. “While proposals do not sound bad,” Miklos cabled to Washington, “they have definite Pollyanna-ish ring about them, and most observers of Iranian scene, while wishing for more liberalization, would hardly agree with characterization of present-day Iran as unqualified ‘dictatorship.’ ” All but channeling the shah, who consistently attributed almost all opposition to communist mischief-making, Miklos concluded that the bloc signing the letter “is solidly to the left, radical side of Iranian political center and so recognized by most who are politically aware.”

What’s more, it wasn’t as if Gary Sick would have an opportunity to take an independent sounding of things during his brief time in Tehran. At 5:30 that evening, not even an hour after Air Force One had touched down at Mehrabad, he joined Carter and a select handful of aides in the shah’s private office at Saadabad Palace for what amounted to a briefing on the current status of the Arab-Israeli peace negotiations, followed by another detailed strategy session on how best to steer Iran’s military shopping list past the scrutiny of bean-counting critics in Congress. After that, it was on to the banquet hall of Niavaran Palace for a lavish state dinner.

As he had six weeks earlier, just before the meal got under way, Carter rose to deliver a toast. Once he started, Sick quickly sensed he was going off script. “And it was always a bit worrisome when the president did that,” Sick explained, “because he tended to go in for these really fulsome, over-the-top toasts.”

More than fulsome, Carter’s ad libs that night tended toward the schmaltzy. In his telling, the principal reason he was in Tehran at that moment was that several weeks earlier he’d asked his wife, Rosalynn, with whom she’d like to spend New Year’s Eve. “And she said, ‘Above all others, I think, with the Shah and Empress Farah.’ So we arranged the trip accordingly and came to be with you.” Building on that implausible scenario, Carter recounted a remarkably serene recent evening at the White House wherein his ten-year-old daughter, Amy, had climbed onto his lap, and together they had spent “several hours” poring through a book of photographs of Iran, enthralled and beguiled by their beauty.

But it was what the president said toward the end of his toast that most raised eyebrows and was destined to be endlessly requoted in the months ahead. “Iran,” Carter announced, “because of the great leadership of the Shah, is an island of stability in one of the more troubled areas of the world.” Turning to a beaming king, the president held out his champagne glass before continuing: “This is a great tribute to you, Your Majesty, and to your leadership and to the respect and the admiration and love which your people give to you.”

Seated a short distance away, Gary Sick recalled exchanging furtive glances with several members of the American delegation. “I think we were all, like, ‘Well, that was a bit much; I wonder if that’s going to come back to haunt us.’ I don’t know if Carter just ad-libbed that or one of the speechwriters snuck it in at the last minute, and in light of all that happened, it’s not like anyone was going to rush to take credit for it.”

And just as with the episode involving Dizzy Gillespie and Sarah Vaughan in Washington, there was to be a moment with the shah in Tehran that would stick in the NSC officer’s mind. It came at the very end of the state dinner, when the American delegation prepared to decamp to the nearby mansion of Ardeshir Zahedi.

For the past five years, Zahedi had served as the Iranian ambassador to the United States, and during that time he had become famous for throwing some of Washington’s most lavish parties and receptions, extravaganzas that routinely received top billing in the society pages of the city’s two newspapers. Gold flakes in champagne, balls of black caviar the size of softballs, party favors worth thousands of dollars—these were all standard features of Zahedi parties. In keeping with diplomatic protocol, Zahedi had returned to Tehran for President Carter’s visit, and word had spread through the American delegation that he was preparing a particularly splendorous New Year’s Eve gala at his Niavaran home in their honor. As the midnight hour approached, and with all the toasts and speeches and folk dances finally at an end, the exhausted Americans could sense their reward lay on the near horizon.

“And then, all of a sudden, the shah grabs [Secretary of State] Cyrus Vance by the arm and leads him out of the room,” Sick remembered. “He doesn’t say anything to anyone, just takes him by the arm and leads him down the hall. So we’re all just kind of standing around, wondering what to do, when Farah comes up and motions for us to follow.”

Passing down the hall, the American delegation, numbering about eighteen, entered what proved to be the shah’s private library at Niavaran—and a particularly odd scene. Along one wall, a phalanx of extravagantly costumed waiters stood at attention before row upon row of bottles of Dom Pérignon champagne. On an overhanging balcony, the shah’s older children, the seventeen-year-old crown prince Reza and fourteen-year-old Farahnaz, had taken control of the musical sound system to blast rock music and assiduously ignored the calls of their mother to turn it down. Quite oblivious to all this, the shah and Vance stood at the far end of the room, deep in conversation.

Still unsure of what to do, the Americans milled about the cavernous room, past the waiters at attention, as the clock inexorably ticked toward midnight. At last, the queen approached Sick to ask how Americans celebrated the New Year, whether they drank champagne before or after the clock struck twelve. “I told her you normally poured it ahead of time,” Sick recalled, “but we were getting right up toward midnight at that point, so all of a sudden there’s this mad dash of waiters frantically opening bottles and handing around glasses.”

The NSC officer’s take on that evening was a mixed one. On the one hand, he found it both amusing and endearing that in many ways the shah and shahbanou were much like any other set of parents to teenagers in the late 1970s: hopeless squares in the eyes of their offspring, and just as unable to dictate music volume levels. On the other hand, there was the shah’s need to always be at center stage, not to cede the limelight to another for even a moment. “It just really brought home to me the insecurity of the man,” Sick said. “He clearly hadn’t planned anything—and the very last thing he knew how to do was throw a party—and here Zahedi had this world-class reputation as a host, and the shah just had to steal his thunder. I’m convinced that’s what it was all about.”

There was a curious, and vastly more significant, antecedent to this incident. In 1953, it had been Ardeshir Zahedi’s father, General Fazlollah Zahedi, who spearheaded the coup that toppled Mohammad Mossadegh and restored the shah to power. In appreciation, the shah had made Fazlollah Zahedi his new prime minister but then, jealous of his growing popularity, sacked him and sent him off to a gilded exile in Switzerland as ambassador to the United Nations. Despite this, and despite the many other slights sent his way, Zahedi Sr. had stayed loyal to the King of Kings to the end, as would his son.

“So that was our New Year,” Gary Sick said, still sounding a bit peeved nearly half a century later. “We never did make it to Zahedi’s.”

The next morning, the shah and shahbanou accompanied the Carters to Mehrabad Airport for their departure. Standing on a red carpet before the stairs leading to Air Force One, the two heads of state exchanged brief comments in farewell, and then, as Carter turned to go, the shah engaged in a gesture that was altogether uncharacteristic for him, pulling the president into a heartfelt embrace. He then remained standing on the tarmac, waving goodbye to the man he now considered a close friend, as the Carters climbed the staircase and, after one last wave from the landing, disappeared into the forward cabin. In the next moment, the plane door was closed, the staircase was drawn away and Air Force One moved off. As a subsequent American embassy dispatch noted, even the shah’s normally grim-faced bodyguards appeared disarmed by “the aura of success and goodwill” of the farewell ceremony, its warm informality such a dramatic departure from the protocol-obsessed king’s usual manner.

It was to be the last time an American president ever set foot on Iranian soil, and Carter and the shah would never see each other again.

Chapter 7

To judge by its placement, it was almost as if the article were meant not to be read. Indeed, this is precisely what several of the newspaper’s editors, observing the cataclysm it helped unleash, would try to claim afterward.

Under the title “Iran and the Red and Black Colonialism,” the editorial appeared on page 7 of Etalaat, Iran’s leading afternoon newspaper, on January 7, 1978. Set in small type directly beneath a large ad for a company called Tabriz Machine Tools, it might have escaped notice altogether if not for the fact of its utter incongruity: a smear campaign against an exiled religious leader who had been effectively erased from Iran’s mainstream media for well over a decade. Instead, many historians have likened that awkwardly written column in Etalaat to the butterfly effect that might spur a hurricane, the small, seemingly innocuous act that was to propel the shah’s greatest nemesis, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, back onto the national stage and set into motion the Iranian Revolution.

By almost any measure, as 1978 dawned, Iran was one of the Middle East’s “better dictatorships.” While certain professional classes or minority groups were distrusted and persecuted by the regime, they were not slaughtered en masse as in Hafez al-Assad’s Syria or Saddam Hussein’s Iraq. Its jails continued to hold some twenty-five hundred political prisoners, but that figure was greatly reduced from a few years earlier and a minute fraction on a per capita basis when set against Muammar Qaddafi’s Libya or Houari Boumediene’s Algeria. Iran’s ruling class was venal and corrupt and existed largely outside the law, but with nowhere approaching the blanket impunity or squalid decadence of the royal families of Saudi Arabia or Kuwait. What’s more, Iran was becoming a better dictatorship all the time. As a result of the shah’s recent political and judicial reforms, the opposition had far more maneuverability than in most other nations in the region, and whereas Iranian prisoners had been routinely tortured by the regime’s thugs in the past, international human rights investigators reported that in 1977 the number of new cases had been cut to precisely zero.

Yet as 1978 began, Iran still bore many of the distinguishing characteristics of dictatorships everywhere. The most obvious of these was fear. With the regime promoting the idea that its SAVAK security apparatus was all-seeing, most Iranians continued to be extremely guarded when voicing complaints about the state. Then there was that other feature intrinsic to dictatorships, one that often leads to grinding inertia or grievous self-inflicted wounds: stupidity, a default mode of profound, even impregnable passivity that grows more acute the closer one gets to the locus of power. This passivity is also rooted in fear, of course, the worry of losing one’s standing within the power structure—or, in more robust dictatorships, of losing one’s head—but it is the constant second-guessing of what might please the strongman or his representative at the next level up the governing ladder that causes the lower-level functionary to gradually lose the ability to act or think independently at all. To the contrary, the best and safest course in this timorous society is to never question or initiate, to simply go along with whatever edict or passing whim works its way down the chain of command. In just this way, the senior government minister subjected to the babblings of the strongman hears only brilliance, while the lowliest traffic policeman accepts without question that today he shall ticket only blue cars or allow only right-hand turns.

The inherent danger of this arrangement is the chance that someday an idea of truly exceptional idiocy will come along, and there will be no one with the foresight or courage to stop it. By all evidence, it was this exact phenomenon that led to the fateful editorial in Etalaat.

On January 4, 1978, just three days after President Carter’s lightning visit to Iran ended, the shah’s rubber-stamp Rastakhiz Party held its one-day annual congress in downtown Tehran. Along with reappointing the sitting prime minister, Jamshid Amouzegar, one speaker after another took to the lectern to parrot that season’s political slogan: the need to combat an alleged national peril posed by something called “red and black colonialism.” In reality, this was merely a light reworking of a narrative the shah had intermittently promoted for decades, which held that the two political extremes opposed to his rule—the “red” communists and the “black” religious archconservatives—were working in secret concert. If this wasn’t treasonous enough, these conspirators were also conducting their subversion in the service of a “colonial” power that sought to dismember the kingdom. As to the identity of this colonial power, the shah had always liked to keep that part loose: The Soviet Union was a perennial favorite, but it could be traded out for Great Britain or even the United States depending on the situation or the mood of the nation. When it came time to pen the editorial for the state-controlled Etalaat newspaper, it seemed the British were once again in disfavor.

Written under a pseudonym, the awkwardly worded article took direct aim at Khomeini, effectively accusing him of being the mastermind behind this peculiar alliance of atheistic communists and religious fundamentalists. The writer clearly subscribed to the Big Lie approach to character assassination, for in addition to a veiled suggestion of homosexuality he claimed that, “by his own admission, Ruhollah Khomeini had lived in India and there had relations with the centers of English imperialism”—never mind that Khomeini had never been to India and loathed the English nearly as much as he did the Israelis and Americans. “Millions of Iranian Muslims,” the writer concluded, “will ponder how Iran’s enemies choose their accomplices as need arises, even accomplices dressed in the sacred and honorable cloth of the clergyman.”

The timing of the attack was deeply puzzling, considering that Khomeini had been effectively excised from the consciousness of mainstream Iranian society ever since his 1964 exile. Certainly some of the more conservative faithful knew of him and might even have heard recordings of his denunciations of the shah in underground prayer meetings like those attended by George Braswell, but these were a distinct minority. On the other hand, Khomeini had recently stepped up his attacks on the regime, denouncing both Carter’s visit to Tehran and the “farce” of the Rastakhiz congress, and it seems someone within Iran’s ruling structure finally decided they’d had enough.

That someone was almost surely the shah himself, for, given how imperial Iran worked, it is simply inconceivable that an underling would have produced such an inflammatory attack on his own. Beyond that, though, the chain of responsibility becomes steadily murkier, a miasma of accusations and competitive finger-pointing that persists nearly half a century later.

According to some, the shah entrusted the mudslinging task to Amir Abbas Hoveyda, his former prime minister and new minister of court—he’d taken over from the dying Asadollah Alam—who passed the assignment along to two trusted newspaper writers. In a rival version, one favored by Hoveyda’s many enemies around the palace, the new court minister not only wrote the article himself but did so of his own volition to embarrass Jamshid Amouzegar, his replacement as prime minister, and regain the shah’s favor. Where all accounts briefly dovetail is that at some point the incendiary tract landed on the desk of the minister of information, who might or might not have actually read it—he would insist the latter—before sending it on to Etalaat for publication. Except the Etalaat editors were so alarmed by the column’s scurrilous tone, by some accounts, that they took their worries back up through the ranks of the Iranian bureaucracy, all the way to Prime Minister Amouzegar. At that point, Amouzegar either did or did not read the editorial, and either did or did not say, “If the shahanshah wants something published, then it should be published.” Apparently, the one thing no one involved in this convoluted tale thought to do was take the matter up with the King of Kings himself—at least, that’s according to the shah, who would forever stoutly deny all knowledge. Whatever the path it actually traveled, by January 7 the column was finally cleared for publication and, perhaps in a last bid to limit its readership, tucked beneath the ad for Tabriz Machine Tools.

If that was the idea, it didn’t work. Within hours, copies of the editorial were circulating among an enraged religious community. The fury was especially pronounced in the holy city of Qom, Khomeini’s home for fifty years prior to his exile. Beginning that same evening and continuing for the next two days, bands of religious devotees, mostly young men armed with iron bars or wooden staves, charged through Qom’s streets, smashing the windows of government buildings and any stores that had ignored a fatwa, or religious edict, to close shop in protest over the Etalaat attack on Khomeini.

On the afternoon of January 9, the protests turned deadly. According to a number of witnesses, it started when a large crowd of demonstrators attempted to storm a police precinct station, and the besieged policemen within fired a scattered volley of warning shots. When this had no appreciable effect on the crowd and their attack continued, the police fired directly into their midst. While the number of casualties was disputed and swiftly led to rival claims—and this, too, would become a hallmark of the revolution soon to come—at least four and perhaps as many as fourteen demonstrators lay dead in the streets of Qom, either from police bullets or from the ensuing stampede, while the number of injured climbed to more than a hundred. Through a breathtaking act of stupidity, the shah’s regime had abruptly bestowed upon Ayatollah Khomeini a prominence he had vainly struggled to attain for years. But it had done worse. With the killings in Qom, the worst outbreak of civil strife in Iran since the clerical riots of 1963, they gave the kingdom’s vast and disparate religious opposition a unifying rallying cry.

Not that any of this was immediately apparent to most citizens of Iran—and certainly not to the occupants of the American embassy, eighty miles up the road from Qom. For a full week following the violence, and clearly hewing to the line being promoted by the Iranian regime, the embassy continued to report to Washington that the unrest was sparked by archconservatives protesting the anniversary of either the shah’s 1963 land reform initiative or Reza Shah’s 1936 abolition of the veil. In fact, it wasn’t until nearly three weeks after the deaths in Qom that the embassy appeared to first learn of the Etalaat editorial and the signal role it had played in the strife. This hardly changed the equation; as Ambassador Sullivan had assured Washington in a secret cable on January 16, “Level of violence and impact of events are by no—repeat no—means significant threat to GOI [Government of Iran].” The embassy reiterated this view in subsequent days, even as the nation was beset by a number of intermittent street protests and bazaar closings in response to the Qom tragedy.

But then matters settled down. Certainly, no one seemed to be dwelling on the matter by January 25, the fifteenth anniversary of the inauguration of the shah’s White Revolution, when untold millions of Iranians took to the streets with banners and floats and balloons in celebration. In Tehran alone, an estimated 300,000 pro-government revelers paraded despite a cold and constant drizzle. True, the marchers were organized by their workplaces and schools, having all shut down for the day, and participation in the festivities was mandatory, but the whispered predictions of violence in retaliation for Qom failed to materialize. Instead, Ambassador Sullivan reported, the anniversary passed with perfect calm, even if, he archly noted, the populace appeared less than thrilled by the shah’s newly unveiled national slogan: “Work, work and more work!” The next day, the American ambassador effectively closed the books on the recent spasm of protest, noting that while the “organizational accomplishments of ayatollahs and mullahs in response to Gom [sic] events seem impressive,” the malcontents would surely find it difficult to replicate “in absence of additional crystallizing incidents.”

But in this view, William Sullivan was quite wrong—or at least working with a very different definition of “crystallizing incidents” from the Iranian faithful. In particular, he seemed to have little conception of the Shiite religious observance known as Arbaeen.

Literally translated from Arabic as “fortieth,” Arbaeen in the official Shiite religious calendar is the fortieth day after the high holy day of Ashura, when the faithful take to the streets en masse to mourn the murder of the Prophet Mohammed’s grandson, Hussein, in AD 680; the ritual of public grieving that occurs on Ashura is then replicated on Arbaeen. Over the centuries, the Arbaeen observance has expanded to become a mourning milestone for all Shia deceased, with the passions and expressions of sorrow manifested on the forty-day anniversary of someone’s passing often surpassing those displayed during the actual burial ceremony. At various times in Iranian history, the Shia faithful, as well as political dissidents, have used the religious cloak of Arbaeen as a vehicle to protest the existing regime, and most especially when those being mourned could be considered shahids, or martyrs, to that regime’s injustices. For those who opposed the modern-day King of Kings, what had occurred in Qom on January 9 was most definitely a “crystallizing incident,” but so might be its forty-day anniversary. In 1978, that anniversary fell on February 18.

* * *

The first suggestion that something was amiss was the columns of black smoke rising into the sky from beyond the compound walls. This smoke clearly didn’t stem from the usual charcoal and dung fires of an Iranian winter—those produced a wispy brown film, whereas this was roiling and thick—and the columns appeared to multiply and draw nearer as the morning extended. Eventually, sight was joined by sound. This, too, grew steadily closer, but they were sounds so out of the ordinary way of things that they took some time to identify: the unbroken wail of overlapping car horns; the dull roar produced by a thousand chanting voices; the high-pitched crackle, rather like that of cellophane being wadded into a ball, produced by distant machine-gun fire. It was about then that Michael Metrinko, standing on the manicured grounds of the American consulate in Tabriz, sensed trouble was headed his way. “I still didn’t know exactly what was happening,” he later explained, “but I knew I was in for a long day.”

Until that morning of February 18, 1978, Metrinko figured he had lucked into just about the sweetest deal going in the foreign service. Shortly after his run-in with Ambassador Sullivan and Jack Miklos over his “anti-shah” reports the previous summer, the embassy in Tehran had put out the word that they were looking for an employee to oversee the sale and shuttering of the consulate in Tabriz, a crossroads city in northwestern Iran close to the borders of Turkey and the Soviet Union. The temporary assignment sounded more like a job for a mover than a diplomat—once the sale of the consulate was finalized, the officer would oversee the packing up and shipping of its furnishings and files to the capital—but Metrinko, already feeling like the odd man out at the embassy and growing bored of the visa office, quickly volunteered. Since the primary language spoken in Tabriz was Turkish, a language Metrinko had mastered during his first Peace Corps assignment, he was just as quickly approved for the task, and set off for the provincial city that September.

Built at the height of the Cold War, the Tabriz consulate compound had originally been intended to serve as a CIA forward base, home to as many as a dozen intelligence officers detailed to keep watch over the Soviet frontier, just fifty miles away. It had also been intended that these officers would suffer little in the way of want. Along with an enormous mansion and adjacent guesthouse, the walled fifteen-acre compound at the southern end of town housed an Olympic-sized swimming pool, volleyball courts and a softball field, along with duck ponds, rose gardens and an orchard comprising some twelve hundred fruit trees. But no sooner was construction of the opulent spy nest completed than the advent of the satellite and the establishment of two large CIA electronic listening posts flush on the Soviet border made the need for such labor-intensive “human intelligence” stations obsolete. The CIA had quietly foisted its white elephant on the State Department for use as its regional consulate, but given both the enormous cost of maintaining the compound and the scant need of consular services in Tabriz—of the tens of thousands of Americans living in Iran by the mid-1970s, only an estimated 150 lived in the district—State had been trying to unload the place for years. With a buyer at last in hand by the summer of 1977, the plan was to close down the consular mission in Tabriz altogether.

No sooner had Metrinko arrived in Tabriz, however, than Washington decided this wasn’t the time to be reducing its diplomatic footprint in Iran, that although few American companies had set up shop in that corner of the kingdom thus far, this was likely to change as it further industrialized and integrated into the global economy. Joined to this was concern over how such a closure might be viewed by a perpetually insecure shah vigilant for signs that Washington was loosening its ties to him. With the young Carter administration eager to send precisely the opposite message to the King of Kings, it was decided the Tabriz mission would remain, albeit reduced to a single consular officer occupying far humbler quarters.

Except then the sale of the Tabriz property abruptly fell through, leaving Michael Metrinko as the sole resident of the palatial expanse. Sole resident, perhaps, but hardly alone: Along with an office assistant, the compound’s household staff included a cook, a housemaid and a driver, as well as a five-man landscaping crew. “It was wonderful,” Metrinko recounted. “It was like living as a—well, kind of like a little shah.”

Not so wonderful, though, on that morning of February 18, 1978. As the smoke plumes multiplied and the sound of gunfire drew nearer, Metrinko could be forgiven for feeling a bit marooned, cognizant that he was the only American diplomat in a three-hundred-mile radius.

While he was sequestered behind the compound walls, his chief source of information initially was his local staff, who used the consulate phones to call around to family and friends. From these calls, there began to emerge at least a fragmentary picture of what was taking place.

As Metrinko now learned, on the previous afternoon, a Friday, anonymous leaflets had circulated in Tabriz urging all businesses and workers to observe a general strike on the following day. This strike was to protest a spate of killings by security forces—killings that Metrinko was also hearing about for the first time—that had occurred in the holy city of Qom forty days earlier. This strike call appeared to have been heeded by most small shopkeepers in Tabriz but roundly ignored by government agencies as well as those larger businesses located in the city’s modern quarters. By 9:00 a.m., a group of mostly young men had gathered near the shuttered central bazaar to protest, but what started out as religious chants soon devolved into antigovernment ones. In time-honored Iranian tradition, squadrons of baton-wielding police then set upon the protesters, but on this morning their ministrations had little effect; instead of dispersing, the crowd grew in both size and fervor. And then a flash point was reached, with chants giving way to the throwing of stones and then to the smashing of windows, the lobbing of Molotov cocktails. As the police fell back in disarray, flying columns of protesters surged into the city’s modern commercial district, smashing more windows, ransacking lobbies and setting buildings on fire. In a frantic effort to regain control, some police units took to firing warning shots over the heads of the crowds—this was the early gunfire Metrinko had heard—but this seemed only to enrage them further. Within the hour, a huge swath of central Tabriz was being ravaged by the mob, now numbering in the several thousands, as the hapless police retreated or simply stood by. As 11:00 a.m. approached, one attack column was a mere two blocks from the American consulate.

Somewhat counterintuitively, one of Metrinko’s first official acts that day was to dismiss his local security detail. This consisted of three Iranian police sergeants who dutifully showed up at the consulate early each morning to offer their protective services, assistance Metrinko almost always declined. “In fact,” he recalled, “just about the only times I took them along was when I was meeting a high-ranking local official, like the governor-general, because then it looked like they served a purpose, and their superiors wouldn’t reassign them to where they might have to actually do something. They were very grateful to me for that.” On the morning of February 18, the consul saw even less reason than usual to keep the sergeants around. “They weren’t exactly what you would call highly trained,” he explained. “I figured if something was going to happen at the consulate, I’d have a better chance if they weren’t getting in my way, so I suggested that they just go on back to their own homes.”

Enormously relieved to be let go, the three policemen swiftly fled the compound. This left Metrinko with the prospect of having to face off with a mob of violent antigovernment demonstrators—and given the United States’ unwavering support for that government, potentially anti-American demonstrators—all by himself. This outcome was avoided, if narrowly. Shortly before noon, a police unit formed a security line along the consulate’s outer wall, and their numbers were soon augmented by soldiers bused in from a nearby army base. It was the influx of these troops that gradually shifted the balance of power in Tabriz. Eschewing the police tactic of firing warning shots over heads, the soldiers took to firing directly into the crowds. Along with the deployment of Chieftain tanks at major intersections, this produced a chastening effect, so that by evening only scattered bands of rioters still roamed the city’s backstreets. Rather like flare-ups in a smoldering forest fire, there continued to be isolated bursts of unrest over the following two days—an arson attack here, a marauding band of window smashers there—but whether due to the blanketing presence of the army or to the mob’s collective rage simply burning itself out, a tense quiet gradually settled in.

Taking advantage of that quiet, Metrinko made his first foray out into Tabriz on the morning of February 19. He was stunned by what he found. “The commercial district, the modern downtown, was just gutted. Some of the buildings were still burning because there weren’t enough fire crews to deal with them all. The banks down there had been ransacked, their files and desks thrown out into the streets, so that for several days you’d see bank documents just sort of blowing around the city.”

But the devastation wasn’t confined to the modern downtown. As Metrinko discovered during his travels that day, paths of destruction crisscrossed Tabriz, stretching some seven miles from east to west, and nearly three miles north to south. And there was nothing at all random about which places had been attacked, which spared. To the contrary, the damage provided a virtual guidebook to the protesters’ fury. Foremost had been the symbols and agencies of the imperial regime. The local headquarters of Rastakhiz, Iran’s only officially sanctioned political party, was totally gutted, as were a number of police stations and government offices; the rioters had even directed their wrath and Molotov cocktails at the government-run Youth Palace, a mixed sports-and-propaganda arena downtown. One revealing indication of the crowd’s animus was that while the great majority of individually owned stores escaped damage, almost any whose name made reference to the shah or shahbanou or the Pahlavi dynasty had been vandalized.

Also attacked were those edifices that spoke to modernity or Westernization. Dozens of bank branches had been sacked and at least ten completely destroyed, apparently targeted for their violation of Islamic strictures against usury. The ground-floor windows of almost every downtown hotel had been smashed, as had those of movie theaters showing “sexy,” or Western-made, films. In a potentially ominous sign for the American presence in Tabriz, the Iran-America Society building downtown, a cultural institution that taught English-language courses and sponsored movies and concerts, had been ransacked, even as every other building on its block had been left alone.

Along with the physical, there was the human cost. While the government initially reported just six demonstrators had been killed, a figure that eventually floated up into the teens, almost all independent observers put the number far higher. From the city governor himself, Metrinko heard of a death toll nearing a hundred, while a foreigner with a view onto a square outside the central bazaar, site of some of the most sustained violence, reported seeing the beds of seven pickup trucks being filled with dead bodies. By every measure—civilians killed, buildings destroyed, bullets fired—the violence that had occurred in Tabriz vastly surpassed the deadly clashes in Qom that had precipitated it.

Certainly, the Iranian media treated it as such. Whereas reporting on the Qom riots had been muted and brief, the bloody events in Tabriz played to banner newspaper headlines and lead stories on radio and television news broadcasts. Perversely, the extensiveness of this coverage was at least partially due to the state’s recent loosening of restrictions on the media, even if the scale of mayhem was such that the regime would have been unable to muzzle it completely. Instead, it took to swiftly pointing the finger at the usual suspects. Already by the evening of February 18, the government-controlled National Iranian Radio and Television network was attributing the violence to “communists and Islamic-Marxists,” a criminal class that subsequently expanded to include “professional agitators” and unspecified foreigners. As the minister of state reported to parliament just three days after the riots, his “investigation” conclusively established that “those who did such destruction were not Iranian.”

But as he delved into the particulars of the riots, the more Consul Metrinko picked up on some contradictory notes. One had to do with the fervently religious and archconservative bent of the demonstrators. This had been evident in their chants—denunciations of the shah had been interspersed with praise for various militant clerics—as well as in some of their actions. A woman driving through downtown had been dragged from her car and severely beaten by a mob for not wearing a chador. Among the banks that had been sacked, it seemed a special ferocity had been directed at those known to be owned by Bahais, adherents of a liberal offshoot of Islam that many conservative Muslims deemed heretical. This same connection, some theorized, might explain the extensive damage done to the local Pepsi-Cola bottling plant, owned by a Bahai, while the nearby Coca-Cola plant escaped unscathed.

And something even more disquieting: a remarkable degree of organization, of crowd discipline amid the chaos. Urban rioting the world over tends to be a “crime of convenience,” meaning that rioters usually inflict the greatest damage in those areas where security forces are least able to exert control. Almost invariably, this means a city’s denser neighborhoods and narrower streets, yet in Tabriz the rioters came out of their cramped working-class slums to ransack the modern city center with its broad boulevards. What’s more, “rioter” is often synonymous with “looter”—but not in Tabriz. In nearly every one of the destroyed banks, investigators found that safety-deposit boxes had remained undisturbed, stacks of Iranian and foreign currency still neatly arranged in tills. Perhaps most bracing was a postscript to the story of the assault on the Pepsi-Cola plant. As Metrinko poked around, he repeatedly heard rumors that the attack was organized and led by managers at the competing Coca-Cola outlet, seeing in the violence a golden opportunity to put a crimp on their business competitor.

From all this, Metrinko concluded not only that the attacks had been coordinated but that extensive planning preceded them. “The rioters had specific targets in mind,” he noted in a report, “and the appearance of different groups in different parts of the city—groups well-supplied with flammable materials to start fires in very selective locations—presuppose a core of instigators who knew very well what they wanted to accomplish.” Further, he wrote, while the weapons wielded by the mobs were largely limited to staves and knives and stones, “even these primitive weapons could not have been picked up at random” in sufficient quantity. The only explanation, he concluded, was that stockpiles had been set out for distribution beforehand.

But along with their particulars, Metrinko became steadily more unsettled by what the riots exposed on a larger scale, about both Iran and his understanding of it. Gregarious by nature and fluent in both Farsi and Turkish, Metrinko had garnered a wide range of friends and acquaintances and work contacts over the course of his first six months in Tabriz, and yet no one had warned him that trouble might be coming on February 18. In fact, it had been only that morning that he learned of the preceding violence in Qom and of the call for a nationwide general strike in protest. How had he been caught so unawares?

And even this wasn’t the worst of it. As they charged through the city’s streets, the Tabriz rioters had interspersed their denunciations of the shah with paeans to the wisdom and teachings of a cleric whom Metrinko had never heard of before: Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. How was it that after four years in Iran, and despite a vast constellation of Iranian friends, he’d never garnered so much as a mention of the man whom young Tabrizi men were now marching and chanting and dying for? “It seems kind of incredible today, what with the internet and all,” Metrinko explained, “but back then, if a regime wanted to scrub someone out of existence and they controlled the media, it was fairly easy to do. So it may have seemed like Khomeini came out of nowhere, but that wasn’t really true; he’d always been there, but in the shadows.”

The American consul also came to appreciate that there was a demographic element at work. His very wide circle of contacts notwithstanding, that network didn’t extend to those who dwelled in the shantytowns on Tabriz’s periphery, and it was these Iranians—mostly young and male and transplants from the countryside—who gravitated toward the austere teachings of clerics like Khomeini and who formed the bulk of those who’d taken to the city’s streets on February 18. “So no,” Metrinko said, “I’d never heard of Khomeini, but what’s interesting about that is that most of my Iranian friends hadn’t either.”

As his adoptive city slowly returned to a semblance of normalcy, the consul set to work on an in-depth analysis of what had occurred and why, with the intention of sending his findings on to the embassy in Tehran.

As to the identity of those who had raged through Tabriz, Metrinko swiftly rejected the regime’s claim of “Islamic-Marxists”—and he wasn’t the first to note the inherent contradiction of that label. Instead, he pointed to “the unemployed and the lowest of the working classes, the disaffected and very volatile strata of the male populace who have nothing to lose by rioting and who are easily led by instigators.” As he noted, Tabriz had seen a massive influx of young and poorly educated men from the countryside in recent years. In the city, the luckiest among them toiled long hours in mindless and low-paying factory jobs, and all were condemned to an unrelievedly drab existence. “Given the pervasive and grim religious environment” in which these men dwelled, Metrinko wrote, “with its emphasis on the restricted role of women and condemnation of such mundane pleasures as the cinema and places where women ‘expose’ themselves to men—i.e. organizations such as social clubs, hotels, the Youth Palace, and the Iran-America Society…it is no wonder that such a group can be led into emotional and violent action. Religion is one of the few remaining constants to this class of people, and their limited conception of Islam and veneration of the Shiite hierarchy are among the few things they can retain in a society in which they feel abandoned and threatened.”

Of course, what Metrinko was describing was in no way unique to Tabriz. Almost every city and sizable town in Iran possessed such a benighted underclass—which suggested the next wave of riots might come almost anywhere and at any time.

But if the American consul was confident in his analysis of the rioters’ origins and motives, he was much less so in his ability to get his superiors at the Tehran embassy to take heed. Not only had Metrinko already run afoul of Ambassador Sullivan and DCM Miklos for suggesting tears in the social fabric of imperial Iran, but both men seemed especially unlikely to respond to a cautionary voice from the Iranian hinterlands. In most American legations abroad, ambassadors and DCMs make a point of periodically visiting whatever consular missions exist outside the capital, but in the six months Metrinko had been in Tabriz, he had yet to receive so much as a phone call from either Sullivan or Miklos. Incredibly, that silence continued even after the events of February 18.

Still, the consul in Tabriz felt it his obligation to at least try to raise the alarm. Five days after the riots, he set aside his other work to pen a long report to the embassy, titled “Rioting and Civil Insurrection in Tabriz: An Initial Analysis.” While largely taken up with a detailed account of what occurred on February 18, toward the close of the five-page, single-spaced paper, Metrinko made a series of prognostications that would soon prove eerily prescient. In the short run, he predicted, the regime would undertake a series of cosmetic steps, including the switching out of various local officials, to lend the appearance of change. “In the longer run,” he concluded, “and far more importantly, the Tabriz insurrection has shown that the actual control of the regime over the provinces can be seriously threatened by religious and social forces long ignored by Tehran, and now far too powerful to be dismissed or easily placated.”

But “dismissed” is precisely how the American embassy chose to handle this unwelcome analysis. Rather than send Metrinko’s full report on to Washington by cable, as befitting an important dispatch, DCM Miklos chose to send a paraphrased and greatly watered-down version. Most shocking, after noting that “Consul [Metrinko] concludes Tabriz incident has opened gates for religious and social forces that will not—repeat not—be easily placated,” Miklos immediately undercut this assessment by writing, “Embassy believes situation not that difficult.”

“In other words,” Metrinko explained, “ ‘don’t pay any attention to what our consul is saying; he’s just some hysteric out in the boondocks.’ ”

But paying attention would have been exceedingly difficult in any event. After Miklos sent his paraphrased cable, Metrinko’s full report was held in the embassy for another ten days and then sent on to Washington via the “snail mail” diplomatic pouch, or airgram. At that point, even if someone in a position of authority happened upon the report—and airgrams were so low priority that very few officials looked at them at all—it would be a full month out of date.

Yet long before then, Michael Metrinko was given a particularly stark reminder of how oblivious his fellow Americans were to conditions on the ground in Iran.

Just days after the February riots, Metrinko received a message that a CIA officer based in Tehran was on his way up to Tabriz to meet with him. “That actually helped to restore my faith in the agency a bit,” he recalled, “because until then I thought their coverage of Iran had been utterly pathetic. After the riots, it was nice to see that someone was actually going to come out to the field and take a look at things.”

After picking up his visitor at the airport, Metrinko began giving him a tour of the shattered city center when the CIA man suddenly sat upright and peered out at the devastation in shock. “What the hell happened here?” he asked.

It turned out that the CIA officer had come to Tabriz to confer with Metrinko on a completely unrelated matter. Despite Tehran station being one of the largest CIA posts in the Middle East, and despite the Tabriz riots having been the lead story of every Iranian newspaper and television news broadcast for days, Metrinko’s CIA visitor had somehow managed to elude all knowledge of the event.

Part Two

The Unraveling

My power, both under law and due to the special spiritual link that I have with my people, is at its highest peak.

—Shah Mohammad Pahlavi, January 25, 1978

But what did I do to them? What did I do to them?

—Shah Mohammad Pahlavi, on mass demonstrations against his rule, September 8, 1978

Chapter 8

It was the greatest gathering of humanity in the two-thousand-year history of Tabriz. Beginning well before dawn on April 9, 1978, a seemingly unending stream of buses and cars closed on the city in northwestern Iran from all points of the surrounding countryside, creating such gridlock on its periphery roads that many simply abandoned their vehicles to cover the last several miles to downtown on foot. Long before reaching it, the rural travelers were engulfed by the flood of city residents making for the same destination. By midmorning, it was estimated that as many as 300,000 men, women and children, or a staggering one-quarter of the population of the province of East Azerbaijan, had massed in central Tabriz.

There they spent the next several hours listening to speeches, waving flags and joining in paeans of praise to their nation and king. Some had fashioned homemade posters and banners extolling the shahanshah and his enlightened rule, and these presented an eye-catching counterpoint to the mass-produced poster, a head-and-shoulders portrait of the monarch in a medal-bedecked uniform, held aloft by countless others. The crowd’s high spirits reached a crescendo when, after a roster of speeches by lesser lights of the regime, Prime Minister Jamshid Amouzegar took to the podium.

The April 9 gathering was billed as both a celebration and an act of defiance, an opportunity for the people of East Azerbaijan to show their resiliency as they set to rebuilding from the bloody riots that had torn through downtown Tabriz less than two months earlier. So that other Iranians might draw inspiration and instruction from the rally, much of the proceedings, including Amouzegar’s fiery half-hour address—that Tabriz would rise from the ashes stronger than before, that those responsible for the mayhem would face justice—was broadcast live over Iran’s national television and radio networks.

For those with a basic grounding in Iranian history, there came at least one puzzling moment in the prime minister’s speech. The ethnic Azerbaijani minority of northwest Iran had always chafed under rule from Tehran and felt a much greater sense of kinship with their Azeri brethren in neighboring Turkey and in the eponymous Soviet state to the immediate north, the Socialist Republic of Azerbaijan. In 1945, provincial leaders in Tabriz had taken advantage of Iran’s post–World War II power vacuum to declare independence. To the enduring sorrow of many Iranian Azeris, independence lasted barely a year, crushed when the shah sent in his troops, and ever since Mohammad Reza Pahlavi had kept a close and wary eye on his most querulous of subjects. As a consequence, it seemed a risky bit of overreach when Jamshid Amouzegar, building to the climax of his speech, averred that East Azerbaijan was an eternal and inviolate part of Iran and that never again would the whispers of secession sully the reputation of its inhabitants. At this, the crowd of 300,000 leaped to their feet and cheered as one, their fervor punctuated by thunderous chants of “Javid shah!” (Long live the shah).

How to explain such an improbable turn? The short answer was that the extravaganza in Tabriz was nothing more than a bit of agitprop theater. In the weeks before April 9, state functionaries had descended on surrounding villages to strongly suggest residents clear their schedules on that day and be waiting when the buses arrived to take them into town. All the city’s factories and schools were shuttered on April 9, with both workers and students advised that the best way to ensure their further employment or education was to make for the rally. On their way there, the attendees were given flags and streamers to wave, posters to hold. As for how they should behave once the festivities got under way, what to chant and when to applaud, years of practice at more modest state gatherings left little need for instruction.

In the seven weeks that separated the Tabriz riots from that assembly, a number of changes had occurred in East Azerbaijan and Iran. Just as Consul Michael Metrinko had predicted, blame for failing to foresee the unrest was placed squarely on the shoulders of dispensable lower-level officials, leading to the sacking of a number of local apparatchiks and SAVAK commanders. One theory as to why Jamshid Amouzegar was so profligate in his praise of the regime that day centered on the fact that the chief scapegoat for the violence, the reviled and now-deposed East Azerbaijan governor-general, was his uncle.

Beyond this, though, the regime had struck a markedly conciliatory approach. With the shah vowing the violence wouldn’t slow his program of political and economic reform, his justice minister announced that the hundreds arrested in Tabriz would be tried in civil courts, rather than by much harsher military tribunals as was customary in such cases; ultimately, the overwhelming majority of those arrested were given nominal fines or let go altogether. In a prisoner amnesty that coincided with the March 15 birthday of the shah’s late father, among the 589 inmates released were 26 convicted of anti-state offenses. More political prisoners were set free in two more mass amnesties that soon followed. In Tabriz, military units that had stood guard over key intersections after the February 18 riots were ordered back to barracks after several weeks and replaced by police. At around the same time, the central government unveiled a raft of new financial subsidies and public works projects for East Azerbaijan, causing Metrinko to coyly ponder if “other areas of Iran will learn from the Tabriz experience and seek to gain the attention of the government by some dramatic gesture.”

The effect of all this on Iran’s dissident elements defied both prediction and easy categorization. Some of the more moderate political and clerical opposition leaders applauded the regime’s tempered response, even as bands of demonstrators took to the streets of a growing number of towns and cities. Whereas these bands had once normally comprised a few dozen protesters, their numbers now often swelled into the hundreds, and just as their calls had taken on a new stridency—their usual religious chants were now occasionally interspersed with the once–utterly taboo cry of “Marg bar shah” (Death to the shah)—so had their actions. As had occurred in Tabriz, banks and police precincts and the local offices of government agencies were the targets of a rising number of window smashings and arson attacks. At the same time, it was all rather diffuse and low-level, easy to overemphasize in a nation where well upward of 99 percent of its thirty-six million inhabitants were still peaceably going about their lives.

At least initially, the shah appeared unruffled. With the forty-day link between the violence in Qom and that in Tabriz clearly established, many braced for even worse trouble on the final weekend in March, the forty-day anniversary of Tabriz. The usually pessimistic king wasn’t one of them. In a meeting with the American ambassador, William Sullivan, on the eve of that weekend, the shah barely mentioned Tabriz and instead talked almost exclusively about his frustrations in getting General Motors to finally break ground on a long-promised auto manufacturing plant in Iran. On this occasion, the King of Kings seemed to read his nation’s mood quite correctly; while the anniversary weekend was marked by scattered violence in a handful of provincial cities, it was far calmer than most anticipated. Then had come the regime’s rejoinder, the grand spectacle in downtown Tabriz.

But while clearly designed to bolster the shah’s standing in the eyes of his countrymen, many of the currents on display in Tabriz on April 9 would also feature in the revolution that was about to destroy him. Both rally and revolution were suffused with the same element of charade, of a learned and ritualized behavior that often served to mask what its actors were truly feeling or thinking or might do next. The result in both instances was theater where the component parts never seemed to quite cohere, a narrative given to improbable twists and turns.

While specifics obviously vary, revolutions tend to develop along a recognizable pattern of acceleration. Put simply, there is usually a steady tightening of tension or violence until either the state implodes and the revolution succeeds or the state co-opts or kills enough of the opposition to cause its collapse. Either way, there is a discernible intensification of events that, depending on one’s point of view, goes from bad to worse or from bad to better.

In the Iranian Revolution, by contrast, there was none of this. In the days and weeks after the Tabriz rally, there came many moments when it seemed the fires of rebellion were spent, when none doubted that the shah and his imperium would easily weather the tempest. Conversely, there were times when the regime appeared to be coming apart at the seams. By that spring, enough protests had been met by police bullets that it meant the same forty-day cycle of mourning that had linked the January deaths in Qom to the February deaths in Tabriz was now being replicated in some corner of Iran virtually every day. Some of these anniversaries were marked by new deaths, ensuring the forty-day cycle would repeat, while others passed in utter peace. There were some days and some marches where protesters greeted security forces with flowers and embraces, and other days and places where they closed on them with iron rods. On the other side of the skirmish line were security units that quailed and broke rather than inflict violence on their countrymen, even as other security units threatened to mutiny if ordered to show restraint any longer.

Yet if the pace of events remained unpredictable, at least one curious pattern did emerge. It was the phenomenon, first observed in the Tabriz riots, of a seemingly leaderless mob suddenly coalescing to focus its rage at a specific target—a pro-shahist department store, perhaps, or a branch of a bank owned by an imperial crony—while leaving those structures around the target undamaged. Also strange was the almost total lack of looting. Targets were burned or smashed beyond repair, but their contents, whether household goods or stacks of rials in cash registers, remained untouched. This was simply not the way riots worked almost anyplace else in the world, and it suggested an especially odd oxymoron, the disciplined mob.

To this the shah and his minions turned to their standby explanation: “the red-and-black conspiracy.”

This was the trope the shah had been peddling going all the way back to the 1940s, which held that his enemies at either end of the political spectrum, the “red” communists and the “black” mullahs, were in secret alliance. To grasp how such an unlikely union worked—for surely even the shah recognized that embracing the concept of archconservative clerics getting into bed with a gang of atheists required some mental gymnastics—it was necessary to travel the somewhat meandering path of reasoning limned by its royal creator.

Since at least the 1953 coup that restored him to power, the shah had harbored an abiding fear of the left, especially the scattered remnants of the outlawed communist Tudeh Party and their Soviet patrons. Never mind that by 1978 it had been a quarter century since the Soviets had shown any sign of assisting Tudeh in its quixotic campaign against his regime; in the shah’s mind the nefarious plots of Moscow and its local lackeys remained fixed. Iran’s Cold War alliance with the United States helped perpetuate this view. With the Soviet Union perched on Iran’s northern border, Tehran and Washington could continually scare each other with tales of Soviet and communist perfidy, good for Washington in its efforts to keep the shah close, good for the shah in shaking more weapons and financial support from his American patrons.

Contributing to this was a dynamic familiar to governments everywhere: the law of bureaucratic self-preservation. Since the shah perceived the left as his greatest threat, his SAVAK secret police served to confirm that perception by devoting the lion’s share of its resources to zealously hunting down leftist malcontents. The result was that by the mid-1970s Iran’s militant left wing consisted of a couple of tiny and barely functional guerrilla groups along with a handful of underground “action cells,” while by far their greatest number were locked away in prison cells. Indeed, so shattered was Iran’s revolutionary left by then that, according to several renegade SAVAK officers, the agency occasionally concocted “communist attacks” to justify its own existence—and, of course, to ensure ample future funding.

But just as the shah lived in mortal fear of the left, so since the earliest days of his reign he had diminished the threat posed by the clerics of the religious right, those “lice-ridden parasites” who, in his view, wished to take Iran back to the fourteenth century. And since these primitives were incapable of even basic hygiene, so this line of reasoning went, they most certainly lacked the wherewithal to organize the sorts of coordinated attacks on the state as had occurred in the 1963 clerical riots and were now occurring again fifteen years later. The only possible explanation was that the right-wing rabble were being led into battle by those masters of civil insurrection, the communists, or by that most pernicious hybrid, the “Islamo-Marxist.”

But in trying to decipher the dynamics of an Iranian protest march, its odd blend of spontaneity and discipline, one can find a more prosaic possible explanation. It is rooted in the one commonality among some 90 percent of all Iranians: Shia Islam.

Since splintering from the majority Sunni branch in the ninth century, Shia Islam has evolved into a charismatic and highly impassioned faith, one that, with its many saints and rituals and high holy days, is sometimes compared to traditional Roman Catholicism. The first month of the Islamic year, Muharram, represents the emotional high point of the Shiite calendar, with its first ten days given over to mourning the martyrdom of Hussein ibn Ali, the Prophet Mohammed’s grandson—and to Shiites, the Prophet’s true inheritor—at the Battle of Karbala in AD 680. During those ten days, the faithful are meant to fast and abstain from all pleasure—Muharram translates as “forbidden”—as they participate in elaborate mourning rituals that culminate in great processions through the streets. In Iran’s larger and more devout cities, these processions can easily number in the hundreds of thousands and, with the marchers chanting their lamentations and prayers in unison, can make for a profoundly moving, almost eerie, spectacle. These mourning rituals reach a climax on the tenth day of Muharram, or Ashura, during which the most fervent of penitents atone for Hussein’s suffering by beating themselves or whipping their backs and chests with metal barbs; these flagellations, too, are often performed in perfect synchronicity, so that over the beating of drums and the cries of the faithful, the air might suddenly be rent by the deep thud of a thousand sheaves of metal striking down hard against a thousand bared backs.

Except it’s not just Muharram, and not just Ashura. In fact, Muharram is but one of four “sacred months” in the Shiite calendar, while the entire year is studded with high holy days—one religious calendar lists ninety-five such days—memorializing everything from historical events to the births and deaths of notable saints and religious teachers. The most important of these are further marked by an exacting numerological system that in the commemoration of the dead, for example, dictates that special rituals are to be performed on the third, seventh and, most especially, fortieth day after a death. The end result of all this is that there is surely no group of faithful more acculturated to participating in mass displays of public assembly, and to move and act and chant as one in their profession of that faith, than Shiite Muslims.

Few knowledgeable outside observers warmed to the shah’s talk of a red-and-black conspiracy; Metrinko, for one, found the idea so risible he could barely bring himself to expend the energy refuting it. What was remarkable, though, was how many Iranians, and especially those of the middle and upper classes, fully accepted the theory, a pool of true believers that extended even to many who were critical of the shah. As noted by George Lambrakis, the political attaché at the American embassy in 1978, “This belief is shared quite widely by otherwise well-informed Iranians, including journalists and businessmen as well as govt servants. To a considerable extent it is based on a fable that communists have been infiltrated as youths into the religious schools and now constitute the mullahs and other organizers of the religious movement.” Accepting this fable meant buying into not only the shah’s notion of a diabolically clever communist party lurking in the shadows but also the idea of Iranians as a nation of witless rubes. Those whom Lambrakis spoke with had no problem with that: “ ‘Proof’ of this [conspiracy] is deduced from the assumption made glibly by many Iranians that the religious people, indeed Iranians in general, are too disorganized and incapable of putting together an efficient movement unless this is done for them by ‘the only organized group in Iran’—the Tudeh party.”

It was here where a certain breakdown in the logic of the shah’s conspiracy theory was apparent. After all, if the religious right remained a bunch of hapless medievalists, and if SAVAK was half as good at hunting down the Tudeh hangers-on as it claimed, then how did the red-and-black plotters continue to function—and not just function but, as the events of early 1978 attested, grow in both numbers and sophistication? The answer to this little conundrum lay in the next ring of conspiracy: The malefactors were being funded and organized by an outside power bent on Iran’s subjugation. This was precisely the charge that had landed the regime in such trouble back in January with its Etalaat editorial, “Iran and the Red and Black Colonialism,” and it was a refrain that Prime Minister Amouzegar returned to in his Tabriz speech on April 9. Along with insisting that those who rioted on February 18 were following the dictates of foreign powers, the prime minister vowed to unmask and destroy “every plot, every design instigated by the colonialists and their hired agents.”

This attack line was hardly unique to imperial Iran, of course. To the contrary, accusing one’s opposition of answering to foreign masters is a standard page in nearly every demagogue’s playbook, a cheap and easy way to paint them as traitors and the enemy within, but an interesting question to be asked is whether the King of Kings himself actually believed it. By all evidence he did. With growing vehemence, the shah told almost every foreign visitor with whom he met in the spring of 1978 that the ongoing unrest in his kingdom clearly stemmed from the machinations of “colonial” forces.

Part of this could be attributed to the simple circular logic that is a staple of all conspiracy theories. On a more profound level, though, the shah’s conviction on this point marked the meeting place of two great currents that ran through both him and his subjects and that were to fundamentally shape the future course of the revolution: a deeply ingrained inferiority complex joined to a deeply ingrained conspiracist mindset.

Going at least as far back as the Qajar shahs, successive generations of Iranians had been bombarded with the message that in almost all conceivable spheres the West was superior to the East and that embracing Western ways—in industry, in medicine, in education, even in dress—was the key to a better life. For at least as long, Iranians had also been inculcated with the belief that their nation was under the constant threat of subjugation by outsiders. History provided so many examples in support of this latter belief, examples ranging from the nineteenth-century Anglo-Russian Great Game to the multinationals’ long and parasitic control of Iran’s oil industry, that by 1978 the typical Iranian of almost any class or station in life was likely to harbor a very conflicted view of the West, a blend of awe and bitter resentment, an impulse toward emulation leavened by deepest suspicion.

No one had done more to fuel that convoluted relationship over the previous thirty-seven years than Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi. This might have been inevitable for a ruler sent off to be educated at a Swiss boarding school at the age of eleven, who dreamed of elevating his nation to the economic status of a France or Germany and who, in pursuit of that dream, cast open the doors of his kingdom to the largest Western expatriate community in the developing world. Paradoxically, it also played to the shah’s advantage to tar his opponents as the stooges, unwitting or otherwise, of would-be foreign usurpers, to promote himself as the one Iranian sophisticated and worldly enough to guard against the outsiders’ rapacious schemes.

Yet it’s also clear that cultivating this love-hate dynamic wasn’t merely a cynical exercise on the shah’s part, that he was held in the thrall of its contradiction, too. This was exemplified by a strange story he began telling early in his reign, and did so with increasing frequency and vehemence in the 1970s.

During World War II, the Big Three powers that militarily occupied Iran—the United States, Great Britain and the Soviet Union—had all agreed to vacate the kingdom at war’s end, but when that day came, Joseph Stalin’s Red Army suddenly grew balky. While the tense standoff ultimately ended peacefully—under intense British and American pressure, the Soviet army finally withdrew—the episode marked the first fraying of the Big Three wartime alliance.

But the King of Kings told a very different account. In his rendition, the British and American governments had approached Stalin with a secret proposal to slice up Iran between themselves, to dismember the twenty-five-hundred-year-old kingdom into three vassal states for their mutual benefit. In the shah’s telling, it had been Stalin, one of the twentieth century’s most grasping and murderous despots, who assumed the unlikely role of hero to the Iranian people by putting a stop to the dastardly Anglo-American scheme.

The problems with this story began with the fact that it was wholly untrue—it’s a matter of ample historical record that the British and Americans worked strenuously to force the Soviets out of Iran—but that was actually the least of it. The bigger question was why the shah would feel compelled to tell it in the first place. Purely from the standpoint of self-interest, it made absolutely no sense to do so. It was one thing to vilify the Russians—their past misdeeds in Iran were well known to all—and certainly most Iranians had little affection for the British, those bloodsucking imperialists of yore, but what possible advantage was there for the shah to pillory that modern cabal of Western power brokers, the Americans, whom most Iranians regarded as their king’s puppet masters? The most obvious explanation is that in doing so, the shah intended to prove he was not the Americans’ puppet, to harness his countrymen’s streak of xenophobia to suggest that he, too, stood in resistance to their imperial sway, but this was going to be an awfully hard sell for a king who also endlessly touted his close relations with Washington and who, as every Iranian knew, owed his throne to the good graces of the CIA.

The more complex answer is that the shah harbored the same inferiority complex and conspiracist mindset as his countrymen. He eagerly sought American approval, at times almost embarrassingly so, even as he remained forever suspicious of American intentions. Nixon and Kissinger believed that in the shah they had a steadfast friend and ally, especially after anointing him their regional military partner in 1972, but as the diaries of Asadollah Alam attest, the monarch never truly trusted in the honesty or integrity of either man. Nothing any American president did over the years served to allay this core element of distrust. Much to the contrary, the suspiciousness deepened as the shah’s own difficulties multiplied in the mid-1970s and accelerated further as civil unrest spread through Iran in the spring of 1978. By that May, these dueling strains of approval seeking and wariness had fused in bewildering fashion, so that even as the shah suspected the Americans were secretly supporting the forces seeking his overthrow—payback for his raising oil prices in 1974, or in furtherance of a secret U.S.-Soviet pact to divide his kingdom, or rooted in whatever bizarre theory caught his attention at the moment—he looked to his American allies, and most especially to their local emissary, Ambassador Sullivan, for advice on how to defeat those forces.

But as with the king, so with his kingdom, so that even long before the revolution reached a crisis point, the suspicion that the unseen hand of the Americans pulled all strings in Iran had begun boomeranging back on the shah in a most ironic fashion. Domestic allies and enemies alike tended to regard the political and social reforms the monarch instituted in 1976 and 1977 not as his own initiatives but as demands placed on him by the Ford and Carter administrations—with his submission to these demands then further evidence of his status as American lapdog. Similarly, the magnitude of the demonstrations accompanying his November 1977 state visit to Washington was held out as proof that Carter had turned against him, for why else would an American leader permit such a humiliating spectacle to befall an ally? And since the Americans covertly controlled nearly every aspect of Iranian life, the spread of protests against the regime in the spring of 1978 could only mean Washington wished it so. In this way, many in the opposition were adopting the same split-personality outlook on events as that of the man they sought to overthrow, so that even as they denounced the shah as an American lackey, they kept watch for further “evidence” that Washington was accelerating its abandonment of him.

This lose-lose paradigm, so damaging to the shah’s standing, found reflection in another development on the Iranian street. By April, an increasing number of antigovernment protests were being met by counterdemonstrations of regime loyalists. These counterdemonstrators called themselves the Resistance Corps and were sufficiently well equipped to face off with their opponents in pitched battles. In several highly publicized cases, Resistance Corps members managed to infiltrate protest marches, passing themselves off as fellow travelers, until at a crucial moment they set upon the leaders, beating and holding them captive until they could be handed over to the authorities. The charade fooled no one, however, because the Iranian people had seen this script before: Resistance Corps members were the authorities, composed primarily of Rastakhiz Party apparatchiks organized and led into battle by plainclothes police or SAVAK thugs. Even the normally obtuse American embassy saw through the farce, concluding that such initiatives “can be boiled down to continuing efforts by the shah and his advisors to test a variety of methods for controlling and dissuading internal dissidents.” Whatever the short-term gain achieved by these purported “citizen actions” was more than offset by their providing the opposition with a handy scapegoat when matters got out of hand, so that it wasn’t antigovernment protesters who firebombed the wrong business, for instance, or who attacked an unveiled woman, but rather agents provocateurs from the state. It wasn’t long before the regime cottoned to the weapon it had handed its enemies and shelved the Resistance Corps, but not soon enough to end a narrative that would continue to haunt it in the months ahead.

The ultimate result of all these contradictory strands in the great Persian passion play was to make for a fantastically unpredictable drama, the impossibility not only of predicting what might come next but even of fully trusting what happened before one’s eyes.

Massively contributing to this opaqueness was the continuing inconstancy of the man at the center of the maelstrom, the King of Kings. In late April, the shah contemptuously dismissed his opponents as “this handful of people from the unholy alliance,” his shorthand descriptor for the red-and-black cabal, but days later William Sullivan found him “tired and depressed” and racked with self-doubt. “Either we are doing something wrong,” he said of the protesters, “or else they are all crazy. But there are so many of them. Can so many all be crazy?”

On May 13, Iranian journalists were invited to Niavaran Palace for a remarkable, no-holds-barred, ninety-minute interview with the king. Broadcast live to the nation, the press conference constituted the shah’s first extended comments on the nation’s unrest since the Tabriz riots, but by most accounts it was a bizarre and unsettling performance. In one moment, the monarch insisted he understood the protesters’ frustrations and outlined a conciliatory path forward, only to then accuse them of trying to tear the country in two. Alternately combative and listless, he launched into a diatribe against the “red-and-black reactionaries,” even while ignoring the softball questions tossed his way by sycophants from the state-run media. Perhaps most bewildering, he repeated his fable that had the United States and Great Britain conspiring to divide Iran at the end of World War II, clearly having given no thought to the obvious question—of why he was now allied with those conspirators—that the story might provoke in his listeners.

In the estimation of Ambassador Sullivan, the May 13 event was a disaster. As he reported to Washington, “A large body of opinion appears to have been surprised, disappointed and perhaps even a little scared by what these people perceived as indecisiveness, nervousness and imprecision in the way the shah conducted the interview…. They find it difficult to interpret what he said or glean an idea of the direction in which he wants them to go.” In trying to explain the poor performance, the ambassador pointed to the dwindling inner circle around the king, that he has “gradually worked himself into a position where he consults fewer and fewer people.”

That circle had recently grown even smaller. Just weeks prior, Asadollah Alam, the man who had so often protected the shah from his worst impulses—and who most surely would have managed the shah’s appearance before the television cameras far differently—had finally succumbed to his leukemia, dying in the intensive care unit of New York University Hospital.

But then, did it actually matter? Just two weeks after the shah’s supposedly disastrous, even mortally wounding, press conference, he and the shahbanou journeyed to the city of Mashhad, a bastion of religious conservatism in northeastern Iran and home to the shrine of Imam Reza, the most sacred Shiite site in the country. As the official guardian of that shrine, the shah made an annual pilgrimage to Mashhad to pray, but many in his entourage had urged he skip that year’s trip, fearing that with his “Muslim-lite” image the visit would be seen as pandering and further fuel the anger of conservatives. Instead, the royal couple received an almost rapturous welcome, with tens of thousands of Mashhadis lining the flower-strewn road leading to the shrine to cheer as they passed.

In this it was reminiscent of an episode several weeks earlier involving the shahbanou. May 10 had been an especially fraught day, another of the forty-day mourning anniversaries linking back to the January riots in Qom, and enormous numbers of security forces had been deployed in Iran’s towns and cities to quell an expected tide of violence. On that same day, however, the queen journeyed to a working-class neighborhood of south Tehran to tour a newly inaugurated hospital. The neighborhood had the reputation of being an opposition stronghold, composed of those formerly rural peasants who had flocked to the capital in search of a better life, only to find squalor, but when Pahlavi emerged from the hospital, thousands gathered outside to cheer her. Without apparent security escort, the queen had then leisurely strolled the dirt alleyways of the neighborhood, taking the hands of children who rushed to her side and accepting flowers proffered by housewives. No one might have predicted it, and for those in search of design the event was quite confounding. In other words, it was another typical day in the Iranian Revolution.

* * *

If the shah and his countrymen couldn’t divine a pattern to events in the late spring of 1978, certainly those Americans looking on from the embassy on Takht-e-Jamshid weren’t about to. But at least by then some were starting to try.

In March, the caliber of the embassy’s senior personnel had seen a marked improvement when Jack Miklos, the longtime second-in-command and chief in-house shah cheerleader, was rotated back to Washington. He was replaced in early May by a very capable foreign service officer, Charles Naas, who had headed the State Department’s Iran desk for the previous four years. This change also provided more maneuvering room for the embassy’s political affairs officers to begin performing that critical aspect of their job—meeting with members of the Iranian opposition—previously thwarted by Miklos. Improvement didn’t come all at once. Having previously been blindsided by outbreaks of unrest, by that spring embassy scribes had fallen into a pattern of issuing dire prognostications about possible impending mayhem that then failed to materialize. After a string of such miscues, on May 30 the embassy analysts felt compelled to send a new communiqué to Washington titled “Why the Sudden Quiet?”

In an effort to make better sense of it all, Naas, the new deputy chief of mission, decided to convene a daylong staff meeting of all those embassy officials most directly involved in tracking the daily course of events in Iran, not just those analysts and attachés based in Tehran, but extending to those foreign service officers manning the three regional consulates. So it was that on the morning of June 5 some fifteen American diplomats gathered in a conference room on the second floor of the embassy, an assemblage that included Michael Metrinko from Tabriz, as well as his counterparts from the consulates in Isfahan and Shiraz.

It is something of a cliché within the American diplomatic community that officers serving in the provinces of a foreign country tend to develop more unvarnished—and often more pessimistic—assessments of a place than those serving in the capital. It rather stands to reason. Away from the capital’s diplomatic party circuit and contented senior government officials, those posted in the provinces gain their insights from talks with their local greengrocer or in meetings with less polished regional bureaucrats; as Michael Metrinko noted of himself and his colleagues in Isfahan and Shiraz, “For us, the real Iran started the moment we stepped out our front doors. For lots of [embassy] people in Tehran, Iran was somewhere else.”

The converse side of this—and this is the second part of the cliché—is that the contrarian assessments of officers in the hinterlands are often discounted by their superiors in the capital, since their messengers can carry the taint of having “gone native.” Even if that hurdle is passed, a further impediment to having their voices reach policy makers in Washington is an informational flow chart that dictates reports from the countryside are first funneled through the embassy, where more senior officers can soften their language down into pablum. Given communication systems at the time, in 1978 such a senior officer had the added tool of assigning an offending report such a low-priority classification for transmission as to all but ensure its oblivion—as Jack Miklos had done with Metrinko’s report on the Tabriz riots. It was in an attempt to work around these obstacles and to get a clearer picture of what was truly occurring in the kingdom that Charles Naas had called the June 5 meeting.

As expected, the consulate officers painted a far more dire picture of the current situation than was then in vogue in Tehran. From Tabriz, Metrinko described a rapidly diminishing city where the local government had effectively ceased to function and where almost all social clubs and movie houses were now permanently shuttered. His counterpart in Shiraz noted that “a whole range of discontents arising from modernization are beginning to surface,” and that Shirazis he had interviewed repeatedly spoke of having lost a sense of personal identity amid the modernizing onslaught. The officers of all three consulates spoke of the worsening tension between government workers, who enjoyed at least some small stake in the existing system, and religious conservatives who, with their growing militancy, hoped to sweep it all away, a schism that was now showing up within the security forces as well. A particularly ominous telltale sign: All three consulates reported a surge in visa applications from minority groups—Christians, Bahais, Baluchis—grown fearful of both the expanding influence and the deepening sectarianism of the protest movement. While none of this exactly constituted news to the senior ranks at the embassy, it was a blunt reminder that Tehran was not Iran, that in the provincial cities and countryside where 85 percent of Iranians still dwelled, matters remained deeply unsettled and were likely to get worse. And worse for the United States as well; as the consular officers warned, “There are situations in which the U.S. could turn very swiftly into a scapegoat for Persian problems.”

That June 5 conference at the embassy might well have served as a turning point in American policy toward Iran, the first clarion call from the countryside that both the shah’s standing with his people and his power structure were rapidly deteriorating. That it did not have this result was largely due to two unusual factors.

In the days and weeks leading up to the embassy meeting, American officials had been repeatedly warned that June 5 was likely to be an extremely tense, and potentially violent, flash-point day. Incredibly, however, no one at the embassy thought to ascertain why this might be the case. Instead, while notifying Washington ahead of time of the possibility of “minor disturbances” on June 5, embassy analysts asserted that the date’s significance was “obscure, but probably related to some mourning period.”

In truth, there was nothing obscure about it at all. In an anniversary-obsessed culture, June 5, 1978, marked the fifteenth anniversary of the 1963 clerical demonstrations that had resulted in the deaths of at least a hundred protesters—up to fifteen thousand, according to some opposition figures—and presaged the exile of Ayatollah Khomeini. It had been the bloodiest day of civil unrest in the history of modern Iran, and for its anniversary in 1978, Ruhollah Khomeini had called for his supporters to take to the streets anew. The Americans on Takht-e-Jamshid Avenue remained so stubbornly oblivious of this that it wasn’t until the very eve of their roundtable meeting—and far too late to cancel or reschedule it—that they finally learned of the date’s significance.

But then something even more remarkable happened. Defying all predictions, June 5, 1978, passed in Iran with an almost eerie calm. Here and there groups of demonstrators did take to the streets, but in vastly smaller numbers—and with far greater civility—than almost anyone had expected. So feeble was the display that it could be argued the Iranian people were not so much refraining from Khomeini’s call to action as actively repudiating it. As a gleeful Ambassador Sullivan reported in a midday cable to Washington, “After holding their breath most of morning, most Tehranis are beginning to joke about another non-event.” Indeed, the most tangible effect the ambassador discerned of the June 5 anniversary was a slight easing of Tehran’s horrendous traffic, enough to make moving around the city almost bearable.

What that day’s calm also meant was that the warnings raised by the consular officers in the embassy’s conference room would go unheeded, would be dismissed as the alarmist pronouncements of Chicken Littles with too much time on their hands. In fact, so sanguine were embassy officials in the aftermath of June 5 that the minutes of that extraordinary meeting weren’t even typed up for another month, and were then sent on to Washington via the same “slow boat to China” route that had earlier condemned Metrinko’s Tabriz report to the bureaucratic void.

Naturally, not everyone had been pleased by the calm of June 5. Among those most deeply disappointed was a man keeping a close watch from the faraway perch of Houston, Texas. His name was Ebrahim Yazdi, a professor of pharmacology at the Baylor College of Medicine of all things, and for him June 5 had been a day laden with promise, one that might bring him a step closer to the fulfillment of a dream that had both sustained and stalked him for most of a lifetime. With the day’s “non-event” outcome, that dream was now further deferred. Thanks to the ministrations of Ebrahim Yazdi himself, however, it wouldn’t remain so for much longer.

Chapter 9

On an afternoon in the autumn of 1965, a handsome, well-dressed man in his midthirties was led across the inner courtyard of the Ansari madrasa in the Iraqi city of Najaf. On the far side of the court, he entered a small dimly lit room, its floor covered with Oriental carpets, that served as the receiving hall for Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini.

As was his custom, the sixty-five-year-old cleric sat cross-legged in the far corner of the room, his back resting against the wall, as his visitor knelt before him. After kissing the ayatollah’s proffered hand and reciting a prayer for his continued good health, the visitor, Dr. Ebrahim Yazdi, explained the reason for his visit.

At the time of that meeting, it was almost exactly a year since Khomeini had been banished from his native Iran for his opposition to the shah. He had spent the first ten months of exile in a provincial city in Turkey but, appalled by the secular nature of Turkish society, petitioned to be allowed to move to Iraq—specifically to Najaf, the spiritual capital of that nation’s Shiite minority. The Iraqi leadership, feuding with the shah and seeing the potential benefit of harboring one of his bitterest enemies, readily agreed, and Khomeini had taken up residence in Najaf just a few weeks before Yazdi’s arrival. Since then, the cleric had busied himself giving lectures at the Ansari madrasa and meeting with a constant stream of disciples seeking his counsel. Of the scores of such audiences Khomeini had granted, the only detail that initially made that afternoon’s meeting at all unusual was Dr. Yazdi’s professional standing and American citizenship.

As was typical of these sessions, the thirty-four-year-old Yazdi—slender and bespectacled and sporting the close-cropped beard common to Iranian men—spoke little. Instead, he listened as Khomeini, in a droning baritone, opined on what was required of Iranians of good faith: unyielding opposition to the impostor shah and his illegitimate regime, unstinting dedication to restoring Iran to the status of a true Muslim nation. But if of little import to Khomeini at the time, for Ebrahim Yazdi that 1965 meeting in Najaf was to be one of life’s defining moments. Ultimately, it would prove to be for Ruhollah Khomeini as well, for it was thanks to the efforts of Dr. Yazdi more than any other individual that the cleric was to emerge from the obscurity of exile to become the face of a revolution.

Born into a middle-class merchant family in the Iranian provincial city of Qazvin, Ebrahim Yazdi was propelled throughout his life by both his Islamic faith and liberal social causes; with a touch of irony, he frequently described himself as a “God-worshipping socialist.” His political awakening came on the campus of the University of Tehran in the early 1950s. It had been the era of Prime Minister Mohammad Mossadegh, and like most educated Iranians of his generation Yazdi was swept up by the nationalist fervor of the time, that exhilarating moment when it appeared Iran might finally cast off the shackles of foreign domination and achieve true independence. While working toward a degree in pharmacology, the brilliant young scholar from Qazvin fell in with a group of pro-Mossadegh activists for whom the contest between the nationalist prime minister and the Western-backed shah was nothing less than an existential one.

“For that reason, I don’t think he ever really got over the 1953 coup,” explained Mehdi Noorbaksh, Yazdi’s son-in-law. A professor of international affairs at Harrisburg University in central Pennsylvania, Noorbaksh married Yazdi’s eldest daughter, Sarah, in 1974 and came to share in his father-in-law’s political crusades. “Yazdi felt terribly bruised by what happened to Mossadegh, and I think it colored his life from then on, that here had been the chance for Iran to finally move forward, only to see it fall back again.” Yazdi himself described the 1953 coup as “the transfer of a national government to a foreign puppet government.”

In that upheaval’s aftermath, Yazdi appeared to settle into the Iranian mainstream, marrying and starting a family while working as the regional sales representative for a multinational pharmaceutical company. Behind the scenes, however, he constantly flirted with his own professional ruin, heavily involved with both Islamic and political groups opposed to royal rule. For a clandestine opposition organization, the National Resistance Movement, he helped operate its underground printing press.

Like most politically conscious Iranians of the time, Yazdi was both keenly aware and embittered by the crucial role the United States had played in overthrowing Mossadegh. This made for a certain contradiction when, in the autumn of 1960, he moved to the United States to take up a research fellowship at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. In the process, Yazdi served as a kind of prototype of the successive waves of Iranian students soon to follow: the politically awakened émigré who admired the American democratic system even as he seethed at that nation’s role in subverting it in his homeland; the devoutly religious transplant from a conservative society simultaneously fascinated and repelled by America’s secularist culture. Rather than abate, this element of inner conflict appeared to take more complex form as time went on so that as he steadily assimilated and prospered in his expatriate life in the United States—his brief stint at MIT was followed by postgraduate work at Fairleigh Dickinson University, ultimately leading to a well-paid research professorship at the Baylor College of Medicine—Yazdi became ever more active in the politics of the anti-shahist Iranian émigré community.

That began very early in his “Western life” when, in 1961, he was drawn to a new Iranian opposition group, the Freedom Movement of Iran (FMI), composed of remnants of Mossadegh’s long-banned National Front party. Led by the former head of the Iranian oil consortium, an engineer named Mehdi Bazargan, the FMI quickly came into the crosshairs of SAVAK, with Bazargan and several other senior officers rounded up and imprisoned on charges of sedition. Outside Iran, Yazdi and a small band of like-minded activists started FMI branches in the United States and Western Europe. This was no small step. From that moment on, the medical researcher from Qazvin must have realized it would be exceedingly difficult for him to ever return to Iran so long as the shah remained in power, that in all likelihood he had consigned himself to a life of exile.

One reason the shah had his minions close on the Freedom Movement so swiftly was the unusually potent threat it posed. By the beginning of the 1960s, the regime’s leftist opponents had been scattered, while those of the religious right were essentially moribund, not yet reenergized by the more radical policies of the shah’s White Revolution. The FMI sought to unite these two ends through a fusing of progressive politics with faith, and the argument that the core tenets of Islam—compassion for the poor, the struggle for equality and justice—all but demanded the mosque be a force for social change. In this, the Freedom Movement had much in common with other progressive faith-based ideologies emerging around the globe at the time, perhaps especially the doctrine of liberation theology percolating through the Catholic Church, albeit with a decidedly Iran-centric focus. “Probably the best way to describe it is religious nationalism,” Mehdi Noorbaksh explained. “It had many of the same goals as some of the anticolonial movements you saw coming up in the developing world, but what made it especially influential in the Iranian context—at least in theory—was that it was rooted in Islam.”

Specifically in Shia Islam. Whereas the majority Sunni branch of Islam has a more “corporatist” structure, what with its clerical councils and ecclesiastical orders, the charismatic tradition of Shia Islam means that senior clerics compete with one another for adherents and, if revered enough, can effectively assume the status of living saints. Needless to say, for a government, the approval or disapproval of such revered clerics can carry tremendous weight. For this reason, the advent of the Freedom Movement spurred the shah’s regime to redouble its traditional carrot-and-stick approach to political problem-solving: muzzling or imprisoning the FMI’s secular leaders while expanding its financial subsidies and outreach to those senior clerics who might otherwise be tempted by the dissidents’ message.

For a would-be revolutionary like Yazdi, it made for a maddening situation. Obviously, exiles like himself could call for change and publicize their cause to the outside world, but what good was it if their message was blocked from the Iranian people? And beyond that question, a more vexing one: Even if their message did get through, how to possibly galvanize the masses for whom democracy and social justice were abstractions and daily life a constant struggle?

At least a partial answer began to emerge with the clerical riots of June 1963. For the first time since the 1953 coup, the “Iranian street” had risen up in protest against the dictates of the king, and they’d found a spiritual leader in the implacable Ruhollah Khomeini. For Ebrahim Yazdi, now the father of four children (ultimately there would be six) and living a comfortable life in the United States, the tumult in Iran exerted a powerful pull to return to his homeland.

He was strongly advised against it by his Freedom Movement colleagues, who warned that in the tightening repression in Iran his past anti-shah activities would surely land him in jail. Instead, the medical researcher quit his job at Fairleigh Dickinson and made for Cairo, there to join a militant group of Iranian exiles who’d been invited to set up shop by the Egyptian president and committed shah antagonist, Gamal Abdel Nasser. While Yazdi always remained rather circumspect about his activities in Egypt—it’s known he was involved in the launching of an anti-shahist radio station and underwent guerrilla warfare training at an Egyptian army base—he didn’t stay long. Concluding that Nasser was using him and his colleagues as pawns in his own campaign against the shah, he instead decamped for Lebanon and a teaching position at the American University of Beirut. He was there when Ayatollah Khomeini was cast from Iran and into a Turkish exile.

Perhaps in reaction to the avowedly leftist and secular rhetoric he’d been exposed to in revolutionary Egypt, the deeply religious Yazdi grew ever more convinced that the unifying force of opposition to the shah was to be found in Islam. Over the course of his tenure in Beirut he made several visits to the city of Najaf in southern Iraq, the spiritual heart of Iraq’s Shiite community, to take the measure of some of the more prominent senior Iranian clerics who’d taken up residence there. It was at this same city of Najaf that the exiled Khomeini arrived in early September 1965. Two months later, Yazdi arranged another trip to meet him.

While naturally stirred by the wave of protests Khomeini had sparked in 1963, many of Yazdi’s FMI colleagues were wary of wholly embracing the firebrand from Qom. Yes, the Freedom Movement leaders were religious, but they were also urbane, highly educated and, in most cases, socially liberal; when it came to finding a clerical ally to rouse the masses, they clearly hoped for someone who was comfortable with the better aspects of modernity rather than the sort of hard-line rejectionist that Khomeini appeared to be.

On the other hand, it wasn’t as if there were a vast pool of moderate dissident clerics out there for FMI leaders to choose from. In the wake of the state’s harsh response to the 1963 demonstrations and Khomeini’s exile, a chastened Iranian clergy had largely fallen back in line with the regime. At the same time, the shah’s American backers, pleased to see their diffident ally finally show a bit of spine, dropped all pretense of pushing the king for reform. By November 1965, Iran appeared to once again be slipping back into political torpor, making for a dispiriting backdrop to Yazdi’s first meeting with Khomeini in Najaf.

“He and Khomeini made a connection with each other almost immediately,” Noorbaksh explained, “but that doesn’t mean they saw eye to eye on everything. That was certainly not the case. But what Yazdi saw in Khomeini was someone who could reach the people, who spoke their language and understood their concerns. Plus, he would not compromise. That was a very important element to this. Inside Iran, you had so many clerics who were willing to make deals with the regime, but never Khomeini.”

From that 1965 meeting came the seeds of an alliance. Returning to the United States with his family the following year, Yazdi settled into a new medical research position at Baylor. Now an American citizen, he continued to slip away to Najaf for meetings with Khomeini and other clerical opponents to the shah whenever time and finances permitted. By 1971, he had so won Khomeini’s confidence that the ayatollah appointed him his personal representative to the Iranian émigré community in North America. Yazdi used that position to both raise funds for his mentor and win adherents to Khomeini’s side through his long involvement with the Iranian branch of the Muslim Students Association (MSA). Until then, the political landscape for dissident Iranian students in the United States had been thoroughly dominated by a militantly left-wing outfit, the Confederation of Iranian Students, but by 1975, Yazdi’s faith-based MSA group had garnered some four thousand members, with five hundred in the Houston area alone. The doctor also helped elevate Khomeini’s stature by turning to the tools of modernity. Although the technology is quaint today, Yazdi was one of the first in the ayatollah’s inner circle to urge that his sermons be recorded and mass-reproduced on tape cassettes. By the late 1960s, those cassettes were being smuggled into Iran, to be listened to by Khomeini’s expanding base of followers, as well as by the visiting American religions professor George Braswell. Little wonder that Khomeini made ample room on his social calendar whenever Dr. Yazdi came to town.

“They developed a very close relationship,” Noorbaksh said. “I think Khomeini saw Yazdi as his outlet to the world, because Yazdi understood how the West thought and acted. But it was much more than that, too. Over time, it became almost a father-to-son relationship.” One indication of this, according to Noorbaksh, was that in later years Yazdi was the only member of Khomeini’s inner circle who didn’t kiss the cleric’s hand in greeting. He also eschewed referring to Khomeini as imam, the exalted salutation eventually adopted by almost everyone, in favor of the far more intimate aga, or father. “Khomeini was formal and liked being shown respect,” Noorbaksh said, “so for Yazdi to address him as aga says a great deal about their closeness.”

The Khomeini-Yazdi relationship was significant for another reason, too. Even today, well over forty years since his unlikely ascent to power, a debate endures over the degree to which Ruhollah Khomeini was a so-called accident of history, a man who happened to be at the right place at the right time, or how much he engineered that ascent through cold calculation. The fault lines in this debate tend to be predicated on one’s political outlook, on whether one resides in the pro- or anti-Khomeini camp, but for this reason it’s instructive to examine the interplay between the ayatollah and one of his most trusted lieutenants in those years before the cleric strode the world stage.

From this examination, it becomes clear that in his dealings with Yazdi, as in his dealings with the growing number of other anti-shahist personalities and groupings popping up in the late 1960s and early 1970s, Khomeini strove to have it both ways, to straddle the political fence whenever and wherever possible. In the presence of Yazdi and his more liberal colleagues, for example, the ayatollah concurred that the 1906 constitution, thoroughly debased by the shah and his father, had to be fully restored, even as he confided to his fellow archconservative clerics his belief that the 1906 tract was superfluous. For years, a quasi-religious Marxist guerrilla organization called the Mujaheddin-al-Khalq sought Khomeini’s blessing for its “armed struggle” against the state; for just as long, the ayatollah refused to either endorse or repudiate the group while excoriating it in private. From early on, all evidence suggests, Khomeini learned the value of being vague at crucial junctures and leaving interpretation up to others.

This isn’t to say that Ebrahim Yazdi was necessarily duped by his mentor. Rather, there appears to have been a strong element of wishful thinking on the doctor’s part in imagining that he, a Western-educated professional living in modern society, might find common ground with a man who, well into his sixties, had never ventured farther than two hundred miles from his birthplace. What’s more, Yazdi was a well-read man, and he’d surely perused some of the many sermons and lectures Khomeini had penned over the years, epistles in which he argued that all forms of government were illegitimate—and this included the parliamentary democracy dear to Yazdi’s heart—save those sanctified by God. Similarly, Yazdi most certainly heard Khomeini’s thunderous rages against Jews and Bahais and Freemasons and other “serpents of Satan,” if only because the ayatollah launched these harangues so frequently. Perhaps the doctor reconciled himself to all this with the thought that in the campaign against the shah there was simply nowhere else to turn.

It wasn’t always so. Well into the 1970s, Yazdi had felt a close ideological kinship with a charismatic Freedom Movement leader two years his junior named Ali Shariati. A spellbinding orator as well as a brilliant polemicist, beginning in the late 1960s, the Tehran-based Shariati won over a great many members of the Iranian intelligentsia to the cause of religious nationalism, enough to finally draw the attention of SAVAK and a prison sentence in 1972. Under pressure from international human rights organizations, Shariati was released to house arrest and finally cast from the country altogether in May 1977, but any hopes that this erudite and far more moderate Islamist might vie with the septuagenarian Khomeini for the mantle of opposition leader were abruptly dashed when, mere weeks into his exile, the forty-three-year-old Shariati dropped dead from a massive heart attack. A devastated Yazdi rushed to London to serve as one of Shariati’s pallbearers. At almost precisely the same moment, from within Iran came the first stirrings of revolt. For religious dissidents looking for a viable leader to harness those stirrings, there was now only the ayatollah in Najaf.

That was made evident when the shah made his state visit to Washington that November. Amid the violent clashes marking that visit, a photographer for The Washington Post happened to capture the image of a small group of anti-shah protesters who stood apart from the others and who, rather than wielding staves or metal rods, calmly held up posters depicting an elderly man in clerical robes and a black turban. Most of these demonstrators were young men and women of college age, but near the center of them stood a handsome man with glasses and a close-cropped salt-and-pepper beard participating in a symbolic hunger strike. It was Ebrahim Yazdi, of course, standing with members of his MSA and their posters of Ruhollah Khomeini.

Yazdi had returned to Houston from that Washington outing in a downcast mood, worried that the violence, most of it perpetrated by the leftist militants of the Confederation of Iranian Students, had fatally tarnished the anti-shah movement in the eyes of both the Iranian people and those Americans who might otherwise be sympathetic to the cause. His gloom soon lifted. First came the demonstrations in Qom, then the much greater conflagration in Tabriz, and suddenly it seemed the revolution Yazdi had dreamed of for twenty-five years might at last come to be. In the process, he was steadily vindicated for having forged his alliance with Khomeini so many years earlier, for the longer the revolt persisted, the more the dour old man in Najaf was becoming its face, its animating spirit.

Which was not to in any way suggest that victory was a given, or even a strong possibility. Like everyone else trying to deduce a trend to the Iranian unrest that winter and early spring of 1978, Yazdi rode a roller coaster of expectations, his soaring hopes of one day giving way to deepest pessimism the next. Finally, a pattern did begin to emerge, but it was not at all the one the medical researcher had hoped to see.

By late April, the demonstration marches that had once shown growing intensity began to noticeably flag. By the next month, they’d grown quieter—and smaller—still. It appeared the protest movement was in danger of withering away, and it didn’t take a clairvoyant to deduce why. In tandem with the protests, the Iranian regime was ramping up its efforts to appease or otherwise co-opt the kingdom’s clerical leaders. That campaign took a variety of forms, from the loud and public to the quiet and covert. In April, the state announced it was increasing financial subsidies for those faithful who wished to make hajj, or pilgrimage, to Mecca. To less fanfare, funds were suddenly made available to help favored mullahs and ayatollahs refurbish mosques, expand madrasas or simply provide said clergy with a few of the finer things in life. In return, a number of clerics were developing a new appreciation for the shah’s rule, urging their followers to either refrain from the protests or at least be more civil in their participation.

In this placating trend, one ayatollah stood out. His name was Mohammad Kazem Shariatmadari, and, although six years Khomeini’s junior, he was considered one of Iran’s most esteemed religious leaders. Unlike Khomeini, Shariatmadari had previously ascribed to the so-called Quietist tradition of Shia Islam, which held that religious leaders should refrain from involvement in politics. By 1978, this precept, a pillar of mosque-and-state relations for decades, was slipping away, and the seventy-two-year-old Shariatmadari had taken to criticizing some of the shah’s more Westernizing initiatives of recent years, even if he couched that criticism in far more polite terms than his exiled colleague in Najaf.

As the political crisis of 1978 extended, another crucial detail about Shariatmadari was increasingly apparent. In the competition for religious standing in Iran, and especially for standing among those religious Iranians disenchanted with the shah, he and Khomeini were becoming rivals, their theater of battle being the Iranian “street.” Time and again, Shariatmadari urged his followers to go about their normal routines even as Khomeini issued calls to shut down the country with protests. On days when Khomeini exhorted his followers to engage in “popular action,” a thinly veiled euphemism for physical confrontation, his Tabrizi counterpart counseled followers to close their shops or leave their workplaces, but to otherwise remain peaceful. By that May, one ayatollah was clearly ascendant. On one occasion after another, Khomeini’s calls for mass protest garnered only thin and desultory crowds. One after another, forty-day mourning anniversaries passed calmly. In the battle for the Iranian street, the old Quietist, Kazem Shariatmadari, seemed to be winning.

It was for this reason that Yazdi and other Khomeini supporters had pinned such hope on June 5, on the prospect of it producing a vast public protest. This was Ruhollah Khomeini’s day, after all, the fifteenth anniversary of his arrest and the bloody demonstrations it had spurred. Surely on this day, of all days, the Iranian people would remember the man who had suffered so much in bearing their shared cause and honor his call to action. But it was not to be. Instead, June 5, 1978, came and went with a remarkable calm, another victory for the accommodationists and another setback for rejectionists like Yazdi.

In testament to the ever-changing currents of contemporary Iran, however, this pattern wouldn’t last for long.

* * *

Despite its “secret” classification, the minutes of the June 5 staff conference at the American embassy didn’t reach State Department headquarters in Washington until a month later. At least then they landed on the desk of someone with long experience in Iran: the former political/military officer Henry Precht.

After his four-year tour in Tehran came to an end in early 1977, Precht had been rotated back to Washington. There he spent an unhappy year in an office primarily dealing with arms control, while scouring the State Department’s personnel listings for a more amenable place to jump. He found it in the spring of 1978 with the news that the long-standing Iran desk director, Charles Naas, would soon be leaving for the embassy in Tehran. “Iran was certainly going to be complicated in my view,” Precht recalled his thinking at the time, “and for that reason I took it.” He assumed the directorship of the Iran desk that June.

Given both Iran’s vital importance to the United States and its recent turmoil, it might seem surprising that even in the summer of 1978 the entire staff of the State Department’s Iran desk consisted of a mere three staff members, two secretaries and an intern. There was a simple explanation for this, though: The enduring consensus in Washington was that the shah would easily ride out the difficulties facing him, that the worst was probably already behind him. Henry Precht shared that view based on his own experiences in Iran, that while unrest might still flare up in the coming few months, there was surely no cause for undue alarm.

He soon began to think a bit differently. It started when he went back through the cable traffic on Iran and came across a recent report from Henry Kissinger.

In mid-May, the former secretary of state had dropped in on the shah in Tehran. Although his visit came at a time of growing calm in Iran, Kissinger found the monarch in a dark and distrustful mood. As Precht later recalled, the shah told Kissinger “that he didn’t see how it was possible for a bunch of ignorant mullahs to lead demonstrations so precisely organized and so effective. There must be some other force behind them.” This was standard fare coming from the shah, of course, but it was the identity of his chief suspect that gave Precht a jolt: “He concluded that the CIA must be behind them.”

When Kissinger pressed the shah on what possible reason the American government would have to turn against one of its closest allies, the King of Kings offered two possible theories. The first was that perhaps the Carter administration felt Tehran was growing too close to Moscow, a coziness that an ultra-right-wing theocracy would put a quick stop to. The other was that the Americans and Soviets were working in tandem, that just as in the Great Game of the past the superpowers were conspiring to carve up the kingdom between themselves.

During his tour in Iran, Precht had met with the shah on a number of occasions, usually on defense and arms purchase matters. Each time, the American political/military officer had come away in awe of the king’s intelligence and breadth of knowledge. In relating the shah’s bizarre musings, Kissinger seemed to be describing another person entirely. “I thought, ‘This is the man on whom we’re relying to save our terribly important interests in Iran?’ ” Precht recalled. “ ‘He is a nut. This is the kind of person I am going to have to deal with?’ ” It also caused the new Iran desk director to ponder the wisdom of his latest career move. “The job was going to be a lot more complicated than I thought.”

Precht’s concerns worsened when he met with the Israeli embassy official who dealt most extensively with Iran, David Tourgeman. There had always been very close ties between Israel and the shah’s regime, and around the State Department it was generally recognized that the Israelis, with their large unofficial “embassy” in Tehran and their deep contacts in the Iranian Jewish community, probably had a better sense of the kingdom’s undercurrents than almost anyone else in Washington. What’s more, Tourgeman had been born and raised in Iran. As a result, Precht was startled when he bluntly stated, “We are already in the post-shah era.” In the Israeli’s view, the rot within the imperial regime had already spread too far, the forces of opposition were too broad and determined, for the King of Kings to be saved.

But even before Precht absorbed this shocking viewpoint, he was swayed back the other way by a visitor to Washington in late June. It was Ambassador William Sullivan. Charming and unflappable, the career diplomat was en route to his vacation home in Mexico for a six-week holiday but had stopped off in Washington for a series of high-level meetings. Paradoxically, most of these were concerned not with the simmering unrest in Iran but rather with the intricacies of a bilateral nuclear power agreement the Carter administration wanted to finalize with the shah. Nevertheless, Precht made a point of attending every open-forum meeting Sullivan held at State, where he pressed the ambassador for his take on Iran’s domestic scene.

“Sullivan’s line then was that it’s all been taken care of,” Precht recalled. In the ambassador’s view, “the shah’s people have found the right address with the mullahs and, providing them with money, satisfied their earthly needs. They would go back to their mosques and remain quiet. Essentially, they had been bought off. It was a very optimistic report.”

What’s more, just as Sullivan was bound for his vacation home, so the shah and his family were about to leave Tehran for their annual extended summer stay on the Caspian Sea. Surely neither man would abandon the Iranian capital if there were anything to worry about.

Along with Henry Precht, another Washington official was keeping close watch over events in Iran that summer: the National Security Council advisor Gary Sick.

While not panicked, Sick had been sufficiently puzzled by the continuing unrest in Iran that he’d begun pulling up whatever recent government reports he could find on the kingdom. Given his ultra-top-secret security clearance, this extended to the most highly classified documents produced by the United States’ various intelligence agencies. The NSC officer was stunned by what he found—or more accurately, what he didn’t find. “There was virtually nothing out there,” Sick recalled. “And what did exist was just extremely cursory. It was the kind of stuff you might expect to find on, say, some obscure Third World country, but considering this was one of our most important allies, it was just astonishingly thin.”

It didn’t take the NSC officer long to identify the root cause of this woeful state of affairs. “It was the deal that Nixon and Kissinger cut with the shah back in 1972,” Sick explained. “If we weren’t going to question the shah about the weapons systems he wanted to buy, we certainly weren’t going to question him about how he ran his country. Our [intelligence] coverage of Iran had always been lacking, but that deal had taken it to a whole new level. Now we were just kind of flying blind, with very little conception of what was truly happening there.”

Sick had found the situation sufficiently alarming that in May he persuaded his superior, National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski, to order up a new National Intelligence Estimate (NIE) on Iran. This was no trifling matter. NIEs are among the most labor-intensive and highly classified documents the American government produces, a compendium of analysis gathered from all applicable departments or intelligence agencies on a given topic, with the ultimate goal of reaching a consensus view to present to the president. Ordering up a new NIE mandates that all affected departments and agencies thoroughly reexamine their past assessments and assumptions and then either modify or justify them anew. It was at least partly in response to Sick’s request for a new NIE on Iran that Michael Metrinko and the other consulate officers had been brought to the Tehran embassy conference table on June 5.

But just as with Henry Precht, Gary Sick’s concerns were greatly allayed when William Sullivan rolled into Washington. The NSC advisor arranged to have a one-on-one lunch with the ambassador at the White House canteen. “And Sullivan’s attitude was basically, ‘There’s absolutely nothing to worry about,’ ” Sick recalled. “ ‘The shah has got this thing figured out, it’s all being taken care of.’ At no point did he display the slightest hint of concern.”

This was a bit puzzling coming from the same man who had described the shah as depressed or listless on several occasions, but Sullivan repeated his rosy assessment when, after lunch, he and Sick went upstairs to the White House annex to meet with Brzezinski. “And he told Brzezinski the same thing he’d told me,” Sick said. “ ‘There’s nothing to worry about. The shah has got this completely under control.’ ”

One reason Sullivan might have been so sanguine when he reached Washington in late June was that he was privy to a secret known to only a tiny handful of people, a handful that did not include Henry Precht or Gary Sick or even Zbigniew Brzezinski; in fact, at that time the secret was probably known to considerably fewer than a dozen people. It involved an ongoing series of clandestine meetings between senior officials of the Iranian government and a particularly high-ranking religious cleric: Ayatollah Mohammad Kazem Shariatmadari. This was the same ayatollah whom Ebrahim Yazdi had identified as being in competition with Khomeini, but the doctor in Texas surely knew nothing of the elaborate maneuvering this competition had set in motion.

In 1964, a CIA analyst compiling a report on Iran’s major clerical figures had included a short biographical sketch of Shariatmadari. He described him as intelligent and self-possessed, but also “a bit of a coward.” For an agency with such a ghastly track record, it might have been one of the most incisive assessments the CIA ever made of an Iranian personality, for behind his soft-spoken and diffident facade the ayatollah from Tabriz possessed a rare talent for backroom intrigue, for seeking advantage against his rivals without appearing to do so and for deftly advancing or retreating as circumstances dictated. It was a talent and ambition that had set him on a collision course with Ruhollah Khomeini early.

Although he was six years Khomeini’s junior, through the 1950s Shariatmadari’s large following in his hometown of Tabriz had made him a far more prominent figure in Iranian clerical circles than the dour madrasa teacher in Qom. That changed with Khomeini’s blistering attacks on the shah beginning in 1962 and culminating in his exile two years later. Thanks to the unwritten code that senior clerics must stand together, Shariatmadari had little choice but to defend Khomeini in that contest, but the arriviste’s newfound eminence clearly rankled. It also set the stage for their growing rivalry. The exiled Khomeini helped ensure this by obliquely criticizing Shariatmadari for taking government funds to expand his Qom madrasa, while also suggesting the coursework there carried “an American flavor.” This insinuation of venality wasn’t wholly misplaced; along with receiving a steady flow of funds from the shah’s coffers, in the early 1970s Shariatmadari traded on his clerical clout to become a paid promoter for Pepsi-Cola.

Yet it would be unfair to attribute Shariatmadari’s conflict with Khomeini to purely personal competition; he truly was far more moderate. Whereas Khomeini sought the shah’s complete removal by 1978, the ayatollah from Tabriz was amenable to the monarch remaining on the throne so long as he “reigned, not ruled.” Similarly, whereas Shariatmadari called for a return to the 1906 constitution and a freely elected parliament, neither of these items ranked high on Khomeini’s wish list or in the future Islamic theocracy he envisioned. Where Shariatmadari’s streak of cowardice came to the fore, though, was in his refusal to take on Khomeini directly, to instead tinker at the margins. On the eve of one forty-day mourning anniversary, for example, he parsed Khomeini’s call for more protest marches by appealing for more placid, if vaguely defined, “commemorative services.” When it came to actually working against Khomeini, Shariatmadari preferred the anonymity of the back room, and it was this preference that had led to his clandestine meetings with the shah’s personal envoys.

These conclaves began in early May 1978 and were overseen by Amir Abbas Hoveyda, the shah’s former prime minister and new minister of court. Hoveyda’s twelve-and-a-half-year run as prime minister had only ended the previous summer, and during his tenure he had managed the elaborate patronage system that disbursed funds to many of the kingdom’s ayatollahs. Shariatmadari was a prime recipient, and the two men came to know each other well. As the civil unrest extended that spring, Hoveyda dispatched an envoy to talk to Shariatmadari’s son-in-law and see if some sort of dialogue toward a resolution could be initiated.

Indeed it could, for Hoveyda had just handed Shariatmadari the opportunity to play power broker between the shah on one side and his rival in Najaf on the other, the chance to extract concessions from the first in order to marginalize the second. Over a series of meetings with Hoveyda’s lieutenant, the ayatollah from Tabriz laid out a set of demands that he and other moderate clerics wanted met by the regime and that, once fulfilled, might go a very long way toward resolving the national crisis. By late May, these discussions had sufficiently advanced for the shah to drop a hint to Ambassador Sullivan. As Sullivan noted in a confidential report to Washington, the shah, although “far from flattering in his appraisal of Shariatmadari,” was confident that he would “reach some understandings with him through intermediaries.”

A prime indication of the ayatollah’s good faith was his undercutting of Khomeini’s call for a national “day of action” on June 5; Shariatmadari’s counter-appeal for stay-at-home calm was largely responsible for the “non-event” that ensued. This was followed by more appeals for restraint in subsequent weeks, so that several more potential flash-point dates passed quietly. On June 17, after the third forty-day mourning cycle for those killed in Tabriz remained peaceful, the moderate ayatollah took the unusual step of publicly declaring his satisfaction at the outcome and his hope that the arbaeen cycle was now at an end. Still, the ever-cautious cleric didn’t want to get ahead of himself. When the BBC carried a story alluding to his secret talks with the regime, Shariatmadari heatedly denied the report and insisted the government do the same.

But the longer these negotiations extended, the more they bumped up against a distinguishing feature of imperial Iran: the shah’s propensity for dithering. Over the course of his reign, there had been countless moments when the king’s advisors or allies had urged him to take prompt action, only to watch him descend into vacillation and paralysis. The most notable example had been his torturous two-year battle with Mohammad Mossadegh, a contest where the shah had equivocated until the last possible minute—indeed, equivocated until the CIA officer overseeing the planned coup informed him the putsch was going forward with or without him.

On the other hand, there had been moments when the monarch’s vacillations had worked out very well for him, when stalling had provided the time to rally his forces or for his opponents to fall out among themselves. In taking note of the spreading peacefulness of that summer of 1978, the shah clearly concluded the tides were on his side, that having already made a series of concessions to his adversaries, there was no need to rush into making more and, in the process, appear to bow down to the likes of a man like Kazem Shariatmadari. Never mind that the calming hand of Shariatmadari was largely responsible for that spreading peacefulness, in the shah’s mind there was still time: time for him to watch his enemies falter; time for the Iranian people to get over their complaining and get back to work; time for him and his family to relax on the Caspian Sea. And after thirty-seven years on the throne and all he had withstood, who was to argue that the King of Kings didn’t know best?

* * *

By the standards of imperial Iran, the royal retreat in Nowshahr was a decidedly modest affair, a two-story building perched on a bluff overlooking the Caspian Sea and consisting of a couple of salons and a mere four bedrooms. Each summer the shah tried to steal away to Nowshahr, ninety miles north of Tehran, with his immediate family for at least a month, a chance to escape both the pressures of office and the oppressive heat of the capital. It was also the one place where the King of Kings seemed to shed his regal bearing, and took some pleasure in doing so, while strictly limiting his normally crushing workday to just a few hours. At Nowshahr, an intimate recalled, “he would read or skip through a few books, almost always in French. He played a lot with the children, did some water-skiing and diving and swam a little. He listened to music a great deal. Life was relaxed and security light.”

Determined to maintain this tradition despite the recent troubles, in the summer of 1978 the shah blocked out a forty-five-day stretch to spend at Nowshahr, but inevitably the outside world made its small intrusions. In early July, this took the form of a visit from a senior American official, the undersecretary of state of Near Eastern affairs, David Newsom, together with Charles Naas, the embassy deputy chief of mission. By then, the kingdom had so calmed that over the course of their leisurely three-hour meeting the three men discussed world affairs as far afield as Rhodesia and the Philippines and barely touched on the Iranian domestic scene at all. When finally they did, the shah was very relaxed, “almost serene,” Naas noted. “He appears to be over his earlier indecision and seems to look forward with some relish to a more open political scene.” A month later, on August 5, Constitution Day, the king took time away from his vacation to deliver a speech to the nation outlining the road ahead and reiterating his promise of parliamentary elections the following summer. This address was far better received than his unsteady outing in May. What’s more, while Ayatollah Khomeini naturally derided the speech, Shariatmadari quietly praised it and instructed an intermediary to apprise the king to that effect. It was perhaps the clearest sign yet that the ayatollah from Tabriz, ever vigilant to cast his lot with the winning side, saw where the advantage lay.

But as always seemed the case in Iran these days, alongside these glad tidings for the regime, a darker counternarrative was building. In late July, a senior cleric and harsh shah critic, Ayatollah Ahmad Kafi, was killed in a car accident in Mashhad. Coming on the heels of the deaths of several other prominent senior clerics—and leaving aside the fact that most had been in their eighties—rumors quickly spread that Kafi and the others had been murdered by SAVAK. These rumors culminated in a particularly bloody confrontation in Mashhad, when a furious mob cornered and set upon a group of policemen. Panicked and outnumbered, the police fired into the crowd; reports reaching the American embassy told of the deaths of nine policemen and some forty demonstrators. As news of the Mashhad violence spread, so the kingdom was beset with more protests, more isolated shootings. It was still diffuse, still only a fraction of the strife of earlier months, but tensions were steadily increasing and just as Ramadan, the month of fasting in which passions and tempers are always close to the surface, was about to commence.

Sure enough, the onset of Ramadan on August 5 saw a steady uptick in street violence. By far the worst occurred in Isfahan on August 11. After days of intensifying friction, thousands of protesters took to downtown streets and, in replication of events in Tabriz six months earlier, ransacked and firebombed banks and cinemas and government buildings. By that afternoon, the situation had so spun out of control that Isfahan was placed under martial law, the first time such a decree had been issued in an Iranian city since the riots of 1963.

The martial law decree did appear to have at least a temporary chastening effect on the opposition, but all eyes now turned to a new potential flash-point date: August 24. Beginning on that Thursday and continuing over the following two days, the Shia faithful would once again take to Iran’s streets, this time to mourn the death of Ali, the Prophet Mohammed’s son-in-law and, according to Shia doctrine, Mohammed’s appointed successor and Islam’s first imam. While this commemoration was also always a period of high religious passion in Iran, its coinciding in 1978 with both Ramadan and the latest outburst of civil unrest made for a potential powder keg.

Against this backdrop, Ayatollah Shariatmadari again dispatched his son-in-law for another clandestine meeting with a government envoy on the evening of August 15. This time, the imperial interlocutor was none other than General Nasser Moghadam, the new head of SAVAK and a man whose appointment two months earlier Shariatmadari had quietly helped engineer. Late into the evening, the two men discussed plans for the days ahead, both keenly cognizant of the dangers August 24 posed.

By then, there had also been a major new development in the Shariatmadari-Khomeini rivalry. A few days earlier, Khomeini had sent Shariatmadari a haughty message demanding that he stop talking about the establishment of a democratic parliament and the writing of a constitution since he, Khomeini, was firmly opposed to both. Shariatmadari sent an icy riposte right back, telling Khomeini that rather than try to dictate to others from afar, he should have the courage to come to Tehran and “speak face to face with the ayatollahs who live in Iran.” For the first time, Shariatmadari had truly stood up to his competitor in Najaf—but there was more. As his son-in-law told the SAVAK chief that night, Shariatmadari and two more very senior ayatollahs were now prepared to issue a proclamation urging all Muslims “to stop killing their brothers and to refrain from public disorder” in return for some fairly cosmetic royal concessions. Here, at last, was just the sort of clerical decree that might bring an end to the strife. No sooner had their conclave finished than General Moghadam hurried over the mountains to confer with the shah at his Caspian Sea retreat.

But still the King of Kings saw no need for urgency. After all, August 24 was still nine days away, and the monarch was looking forward to a few last days of holiday; there remained plenty of time to cut a deal with Shariatmadari, plenty of time to let him and Khomeini and all the other irksome ayatollahs bicker with one another. On August 17, the shah held a press conference for Iranian journalists. Once again, he blamed the nation’s turmoil on “Islamic Marxists,” but breezily assured his audience that they wouldn’t succeed in thwarting his liberalization campaign or in turning the kingdom into “Iranistan.” While reaffirming the raft of reforms he was planning to soon enact, he also issued a barely veiled threat to those who would continue to take to the streets. “If, despite all the civil, individual and political liberties they are to enjoy…they still refuse to quiet down, then what are we supposed to do? I do not need to spell it out. You can readily come up with the answer.”

While the shah gave no indication of concern over the approaching August 24 milestone at that press conference, he appeared to overlook another important date that preceded it: August 19. On that day in 1953, Mohammad Mossadegh had been overthrown and the King of Kings returned to the Peacock Throne. On that day twenty-five years later there would occur another momentous event, one that was to set that same King of Kings on a glide path toward ruin.

Chapter 10

Long before the 8:00 p.m. start of its feature screening, Cinema Rex was filled to capacity. Actually, well beyond capacity. Located on the second floor of a nondescript shopping arcade in a working-class neighborhood of the city of Abadan, the theater was crowded with perhaps as many as seven hundred patrons, but since children were admitted free and no one bothered to count them, the precise number will never be known.

There were several reasons to account for the Rex’s popularity that night, August 19, 1978. It was a holiday, and Abadan, the oil capital of Iran, was famously bereft of recreational activities for the tens of thousands of men, mostly young and mostly single, who had flocked to the city in recent years for work. There was also the small matter of Abadan’s climate. Astride the Shatt-al-Arab waterway just north of the Persian Gulf, the city is located in one of the hottest inhabited zones on earth. With the temperature having topped 110 degrees that day and still lingering in the high nineties at 8:00 p.m., the air-conditioned theater offered at least a brief reprieve from the blast-furnace heat of summer.

One factor that might have given the Rex patrons pause that night was the nature of the holiday. August 19, 1978, was the twenty-fifth anniversary of the coup that ousted Mohammad Mossadegh and restored the shah to power, and while the regime had dubbed it National Uprising Day, to its opponents it made for a bitter milestone. Since the outbreak of unrest in Iran at the beginning of the year, a special target of religious protesters had been cinema houses, and more than two dozen had been smashed to pieces with sledgehammers and iron rods or gutted by fire across the breadth of the kingdom. On National Uprising Day, there was sure to be more.

Yet this was probably only a passing concern at most for those at the Rex. Abadan was a gritty, industrial town, and the tumult shadowing other Iranian cities had barely registered there, its residents too busy, or perhaps too overheated, to protest in the streets. What’s more, most all the theaters attacked thus far had been showing Western or Bollywood imports, so-called sexy films considered offensive by Iran’s conservatives. By contrast, the feature at the Rex that night was Gavaznha (The Deer), a contemporary Iranian drama that, with its depictions of economic hardship and police brutality, had only recently been cleared by the government’s censors. To the degree Gavaznha carried any political message at all, it most certainly wasn’t one to offend the shah’s opponents.

Shortly after the feature began, several of those in the Rex would recall hearing muted explosions from just outside. These probably weren’t explosions in the conventional sense, but rather the sharp whooshing sound created when a match is put to gasoline or another highly flammable product. In the next moment, geysers of flame rose up along the theater’s back wall. This triggered an instant stampede for the exit doors at the front, with patrons scrambling over chairs and railings and each other in a frantic bid to get out. Very quickly, though, the effect of so many people rushing to escape rendered these doors impassable, blocked by the ever-growing tangles of patrons massed before them. Those trapped in these tangles, partially insulated by those trying to crawl over the top of them, probably suffered the slower, more agonizing end; for those caught out in the open, the rapidly depleting oxygen and ferocious heat meant death came in a matter of a few seconds. A handful of patrons managed to fight their way through the smoke and darkness to find an escape route onto the roof, joining the lucky few who had reached the exit doors in time, but the majority of those in the Rex that night never stood a chance.

All the while, another awful scene unfolded outside. Almost as soon as the first survivors burst from the shopping arcade to raise the alarm, would-be rescuers began converging on the site, grabbing up whatever implements they thought might aid their efforts. But nothing helped. So searing was the fire’s heat that getting anywhere near the auditorium was impossible. At first, the cries of those in the street were of the desperate sort one often hears in such situations—pleas for someone, anyone, to do something—but as the futility of rescue and the enormity of the tragedy settled in, those cries gave way to choruses of prayer and wails of grief. By some reports, it took half an hour for the local fire brigade to show up, whereupon they discovered that all the fire hydrants in the area were inoperable. By then, though, it didn’t really matter.

It was early morning before the flames were extinguished and the ruins cooled enough for rescuers to enter. But not actually rescuers, of course. One of those who went in would be forever haunted by the sights and smell, a charnel house of blackened bodies and twisted metal and “burnt bones.” In fact, so many of the dead had been reduced to ash that investigators would only ever be able to approximate the death toll: perhaps 377, perhaps 420, perhaps 40 or 50 more. They were more successful in determining the fire’s cause: arson. From both survivors’ accounts and forensic evidence, it was soon determined that a flammable liquid, probably either gasoline or paint thinner, had been poured around the cinema’s doors and then set alight. Since the fire appeared to start in several places at once, it almost surely meant the attack had been carried out by a group rather than an individual.

By the afternoon of August 20, screaming newspaper headlines and grisly front-page photographs told the Iranian people of “the worst terrorist outrage in living memory.” From across the political spectrum came swift denunciations. A solemn shah released a statement offering his condolences to the families of the dead and setting blame squarely at the feet of the same “Islamic terrorists” who had firebombed so many other cinemas. His information minister urged Iranians to unite against “the great terror.” Conservative clerics who had condoned earlier theater attacks rushed to point out that those had been conducted after hours, with no loss of life, whereas the Abadan tragedy was an abomination. A streak of defensiveness was evident in the statement from Ayatollah Shariatmadari, who asserted the crime had been committed by “hot-headed people with whom we have no links whatsoever.”

Yet amid the national chorus of grief and outrage, one voice was conspicuously absent: that of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini in Najaf. As one government official after another noted in the days immediately following Abadan, Khomeini had offered his full-throated support for past arson attacks on cinemas, and it was his followers who had carried out the lion’s share. To many observers, the continuing silence from Najaf as the days slipped past strongly suggested either a guilty conscience or a groping for damage control. This was certainly the view of the American embassy, which concluded that the “problem of [the] Abadan fire is obviously one which will haunt the opposition for some time to come.”

But this was the view from Tehran. In Abadan, a very different mood was taking hold. Religious custom dictates that Muslims be buried within twenty-four hours of death and in individual grave sites, but so many had died at the Cinema Rex that cemetery workers in Abadan had no choice but to bring in heavy equipment and cut a series of trenches for mass burials that were to go on for days. As the first of these burials got under way on the evening of August 20, some of the tens of thousands of mourners vented their rage against the state. Initially, this anger centered on the government’s perceived incompetence, the reported delay in the fire department’s reaching the scene, the alleged inoperability of the fire hydrants, but it soon tipped into something else, a generalized fury at the corruption that seemed to permeate every aspect of Iranian society. Who had been bribed to approve the design of such an unsafe building? Which crony of the governor-general or the interior minister or the shah himself had won the contract to install fire hydrants that didn’t work? For these grieving Abadanis, the fire was already becoming a symbol of all that was wrong with their kingdom: its callousness and shoddiness; its gulf between the rich, with their European vacations and American universities, and the working poor, who should die like rats as they sought brief respite from their lives of toil.

And it wasn’t as if the regime helped matters. While expressing his condolences to the victims’ families, the shah, coming to the last days of his Caspian Sea holiday, made no plans to visit Abadan. With her much keener sense of the public pulse, the queen expressed her intention to go, only to be talked out of it by the prime minister, who feared her presence might aggravate the situation. Indeed, as the mass burials in Abadan extended over the next several days, no senior government official came down from Tehran.

But that was hardly the worst of it. In celebration of National Uprising Day, every August the queen mother presided over a lavish garden party on the grounds of the Saadabad royal complex. In 1978, that party was scheduled for the day after the Abadan tragedy. Whether intimidated by his strong-willed mother or loath to cancel one of the highlights of the Tehran social calendar, the shah allowed the gala to go ahead as planned. “As always, the reception was sumptuous,” one attendee recalled, “the buffets beautifully laid out and the drink was exceptional. Two orchestras, one Iranian and one Western, played alternately. Gentlemen wore evening dress and ladies wore gowns and jewels.” As even a highly sympathetic shah biographer, Andrew Scott Cooper, noted, “Iranian public opinion was scandalized that the Pahlavi elite drank champagne while Abadan mourned its dead.”

But already something else had begun to permeate the Iranian ether, an element as ominous for the regime as it was predictable: the kicking into gear of the nation’s conspiracy-theory rumor mill.

Even before the ruins of Cinema Rex cooled, stories began circulating in Abadan that the police had deliberately blocked would-be rescuers from reaching the scene. Another story held that a group of antigovernment protesters on the run from SAVAK agents had taken refuge in the crowded movie house; after obtaining the shah’s personal approval, the SAVAK men had then set the place on fire in order to kill or flush the protesters out. An alternative account dispensed with the shah and fugitive protesters in favor of having the SAVAK men set the fire on their own initiative, with plans to blame the resulting tragedy on the opposition. The common thread in all these stories, and others even more unlikely, was government complicity. Another common thread was that these stories traveled at great speed, so that already by the afternoon of August 20, less than a full day after the fire, opposition figures in Tehran began whispering that something was just not right about the regime’s version of events.

It was at this juncture that the palace committed a colossal blunder. Since even denying the rumors was to dignify them, so the thinking apparently went, the best course was to ignore them altogether. Instead, the state should keep placing blame at the feet of Ruhollah Khomeini and let his continuing silence on the matter speak for itself. To appreciate just how great a mistake this was, the shah and his advisors might have done well to remember the consequences of a somewhat similar situation involving Khomeini from ten months earlier.

While overshadowed by their father, Ayatollah Khomeini’s two eldest sons, forty-six-year-old Mostafa and thirty-one-year-old Ahmad, had become respected figures in the religious community of Najaf in their own right by the autumn of 1977. On the evening of October 23, 1977, Mostafa Khomeini had been sharing a communal meal with a group of friends and senior clerics in his Najaf home when he suddenly clutched at his chest and keeled over, dead. With the Iranian opposition movement just beginning to find its legs at the time, and the younger Khomeini in its front ranks, many in his inner circle immediately suspected poisoning by SAVAK.

One who put little stock in this theory was Ayatollah Khomeini himself. While swift to denounce the Iranian regime for all manner of real or perceived crimes, the ayatollah leveled no accusation against either the shah or SAVAK in the days after his son’s passing, instead attributing his death to the “hidden will of providence.” In fact, so disinterested was the patriarch in the whole matter that by some accounts he didn’t even attend Mostafa’s funeral. A few days later, however, a group of astute conservative clerics in Iran thought to parlay Mostafa’s death to political advantage by organizing a mass memorial service in Tehran, a well-attended affair where the younger Khomeini was eulogized as a shahid, or martyr, in the fight against imperial tyranny. Even then the exiled ayatollah seemed reluctant to exploit his son’s death, sending a message of thanks to the memorial organizers stating that while “we are facing a great calamity” under the shah’s misrule, it wasn’t the time to “mention personal tragedies.”

But the rumors of Mostafa’s poisoning didn’t stop, and neither did the political mileage to be gained from them. By mid-November 1977, the stories were so persistent that the regime endeavored to commit the same mistake it would perpetrate ten months later with the Cinema Rex fire: Rather than dispute the tale head-on, the minister of information sent out a directive to Iranian media ordering that there be no mention of Mostafa Khomeini’s death, and most certainly not of the rumors that had him dying at the hands of SAVAK. It was the same mistake censors have made since time immemorial, for, far from quashing the story, its banning gave it new vigor: What but a guilty conscience would cause the state to stay silent? With opposition figures seeing the galvanizing effect Mostafa Khomeini’s “murder” and martyrdom were having on the faithful, a sign that in their malevolent apostasy the shah and his minions would even liquidate men of the cloth, the dead man’s father finally saw its usefulness as well. By the following month, the senior Khomeini was encouraging references to his son as a shahid, a status that had the salutary effect of elevating his own standing in the revolutionary leadership since the regime’s assassins had now purportedly struck his own family.

Indeed, the murder of Mostafa Khomeini by SAVAK became such an accepted point of fact that even a normally jaundiced observer of the Iranian scene like Michael Metrinko never really questioned its validity. It wasn’t until long after the revolution, when the former consul met with an Iranian cleric who was extremely close to the Khomeini family, Ayatollah Morteza Haeri, that Metrinko heard a very different story. “We were talking about the different people who’d been killed or disappeared by SAVAK over the years,” Metrinko recalled, “and I happened to mention Mostafa. And Haeri goes, ‘What do you mean, Michael? SAVAK didn’t kill Mostafa. Mostafa died from overeating.’ ”

Haeri, whose own daughter was married to Mostafa Khomeini, claimed to have been present at the communal meal in Najaf on October 23 where his son-in-law died. As he related to Metrinko, “Mostafa was very fat, and when he ate, it was disgusting; he ate like this.” In the retelling, Metrinko pantomimed shoveling food into his mouth with both hands. “ ‘Mostafa was sitting there, we were eating together, and suddenly he clutched his chest and fell right into the food. He had a heart attack. He died of gluttony.’ ”

In Haeri’s account, those present at the fateful dinner didn’t know how to break the news to the Khomeini patriarch. “None of us wanted to say, ‘Well, he ate himself to death,’ ” the cleric confided to Metrinko, “so we said, ‘Who knows, maybe SAVAK…?’ ”

By the time Metrinko heard this account, the true circumstances of Mostafa Khomeini’s death no longer mattered—he had long since joined the pantheon of martyrs fallen to the cause of an Islamic awakening in Iran—and the tale of the Cinema Rex fire would follow a very similar arc. For the remainder of the shah’s reign, the fire would be added to the roster of crimes hung about the king’s neck, and then swiftly “confirmed” in the revolution’s aftermath. In February 1979, the revolutionary authorities would grab up a former soldier, an army captain named Monir Taheri, and charge him with having carried out the Abadan atrocity in service of his imperial and American paymasters. While Taheri appeared to have an ironclad defense—his service record confirmed he was nowhere near Abadan on August 19—he was found guilty and swiftly put before a firing squad. There the matter might have rested, except that two years later one of the real killers came forward. According to the story Hossein Takbalizade told officials of the new Islamic government, he and three accomplices, all of whom had died in the fire, were ardent followers of Ayatollah Khomeini and had set fire to the Rex in hopes of stoking outrage against the shah’s regime—which, of course, was precisely what occurred. When those officials told Takbalizade to go away—with the Rex fire already “solved,” his confession was most awkward—the conscience-stricken young man instead told his account to a committee of relatives of the fire victims. Threatened by that committee with exposure, the revolutionary government was compelled to hold a new televised trial, at which the tribunal of clerical judges repeatedly tried to get Takbalizade to change his testimony and implicate the former shahist regime. The defendant steadfastly refused to do so and shortly after was put to death. In an apparent effort to muddy the religious motive for the attack, and despite Takbalizade insisting all his coconspirators had died in the fire, the authorities rounded up four others to execute alongside him, including the Rex manager and its elderly absentee owner.

But just as with the case of Mostafa Khomeini, the truth of the Cinema Rex fire had long since ceased to matter by then. On the evening of August 22, 1978, Ayatollah Khomeini at last broke his silence over the tragedy. “I have not yet been informed of all the details,” he announced, “but what is certain is that this inhuman act, contrary to all the laws of Islam, cannot have been committed by the opponents of the shah, who have risked their lives for the sake of the interests of Islam and Iran.” Much to the contrary, the cleric argued, “the evidence points to the criminal hand of the tyrannical regime.” Not evidence in any physical sense, mind, but evidence laid bare if the faithful were to ask themselves some basic questions. “Who benefits from these crimes other than the shah and his accomplices?” Khomeini asked. “Who is there, other than the shah, who has ever enacted periodic savage slaughters of the people, and presented us with such barbaric scenes as this? This heartrending tragedy is intended by the shah to be his masterpiece, to provide material to be exploited to the utmost by his extensive domestic and foreign propaganda apparatus.”

In short, not only had the shah and his government perpetrated the crime, but any protestations to the contrary simply further confirmed their guilt. The ayatollah’s litany of syllogisms quickly fell apart if put to reason, but August 1978 was not a reasoned time in Iran. To the contrary, now even the moderate secular opposition saw the efficacy of traveling the path Khomeini had laid for them. The following day, Karim Sanjabi, the head of the recently revived National Front opposition party, was holding a press conference when asked his take on the Rex fire. “There is no definite proof of who did this,” Sanjabi coolly replied, “but it reminds me of the Reichstag fire.” This was a reference to the 1933 arson attack on the German parliament, long believed to have been set by Hitler’s henchmen as a pretext for his assuming dictatorial powers. With the clerical and secular opposition joined, the shah’s guilt in the Abadan atrocity was swiftly becoming an established “fact.”

* * *

For some people, there come moments when long-held assumptions are abruptly called into question, when what had passed for personal truths are suddenly cast in a new light. For Farah Pahlavi, one such moment came on the morning of August 20, 1978. The royal family had returned to Niavaran Palace from their Caspian Sea getaway the previous evening so as to be on hand for the queen mother’s garden party, but as the horrific details of the Cinema Rex fire began filtering in, the empress had a different thought. Following protocol, she telephoned Prime Minister Jamshid Amouzegar to inform him that she had decided to go to Abadan to join the mourning families. The prime minister replied that he thought this was a very bad idea, but more than his words there was something in his tone that drew the shahbanou up.

“As I listened to him,” she wrote in her memoir, “I suddenly felt that he had lost confidence, confidence in the king and myself as symbols of strength and harmony in the country. I felt that he no longer had the same image of me, the image that had allowed me to talk freely and sincerely with all Iranians over the last twenty years.”

Perhaps one reason that moment so stayed with Pahlavi is that even today, with the passage of nearly half a century, she considers her acquiescence to Amouzegar’s judgment that morning a terrible mistake. “I should have gone to the people,” she explained in her Washington, D.C., living room. “I should have trusted in my instincts. Because even if the visit had gone badly, how bad could it have been? Instead, because none of us went to Abadan, we looked uncaring—or worse, we looked frightened.”

As it happened, there was to be another moment in that month of August 1978 when the empress was to give way against her better judgment. It came one week after the Cinema Rex fire, and it, too, would bear great consequence.

With the national mood growing increasingly dark after Abadan, it seemed the shah at last grasped that his penchant for dithering could not go on. He was helped to this realization by the urgent appeals of his new chief of SAVAK, General Nasser Moghadam.

A career military intelligence officer, the fifty-seven-year-old Moghadam had risen steadily through the ranks of SAVAK, having occupied senior positions in both its internal security and its counterintelligence branches before becoming the shah’s personal adjutant in the early 1970s. Along with a reputation as a progressive reformer—he strongly opposed SAVAK’s routine use of torture, for example—Moghadam possessed a politician’s eye for public relations and could be bracingly forthright in his advice to the shah. “Under the current circumstances,” he had written to the king in April, while still in the security agency’s middle ranks, “the welfare of the country requires the exemplary punishment of some government officials close to the royal family in corrupt machinations.” In normal times, such blunt talk from a mid-level subordinate might have resulted in his dismissal; by the spring of 1978, the shah had been sufficiently impressed by Moghadam’s acumen and directness to make him the new head of SAVAK.

“Moghadam was very smart,” Farah Pahlavi said, “and even more important, he was very honest. My husband came to greatly value his advice.”

Up to a point. Moghadam’s April warning to the shah had been contained in a thirty-page memorandum in which the SAVAK man unsparingly named those in the imperial court he deemed corrupt, a lapse in decorum that resulted in his report being stuck in a drawer and none of his recommendations acted on. In the wake of Cinema Rex, however, the shah was receptive to the advice of honest men once more, and it set the stage for a dramatic meeting with his SAVAK chief a few days later.

As the shah was to recount in Answer to History, the last of his several memoirs, Nasser Moghadam was both emotional and emphatic at that meeting. “Sire, I beg you,” he pleaded, “do something spectacular. All our interests depend on it.” Again and again, the SAVAK chief returned to that word—“spectacular”—but at the moment the shah was at a loss in imagining just how to achieve it. An answer finally came to him. “It occurred to me only a change of government could fulfill this expectation,” he wrote, “a government to which I would give complete freedom of action.”

While the veracity of that second clause can be debated—to the degree the shah ever gave “freedom of action” to underlings, it was only so they might shoulder the blame if problems arose—his definition of “spectacular” turned out to be decidedly modest. On the morning of August 25, he gathered his inner circle of advisors, a group that included General Moghadam, to inform them that he intended to replace Prime Minister Jamshid Amouzegar with a sixty-six-year-old career politician named Jaafar Sharif-Emami.

General Moghadam was aghast at the news. Sharif-Emami had been a gadfly figure in Iranian politics going all the way back to the late 1940s. After flitting between various state ministries in the 1950s—and, if reports were to be believed, amply enriching himself at each step—the politician had ascended to the prime ministership in 1960. He’d lasted there all of eight months. This was followed by an extended tenure as president of the Iranian Senate, a position that provided many new opportunities for personal aggrandizement and that, by 1978, Sharif-Emami had parlayed into two of the more dubious titles to appear on any Iranian’s résumé: titular head of the shah’s universally reviled Rastakhiz Party and president of the Pahlavi Foundation, the shah’s personal financial empire that was widely regarded as a fount of corruption. Just about all that could be said in Sharif-Emami’s favor was that he came from a deeply religious family—his ancestors included a number of prominent clerics—and he enjoyed close ties with many of the kingdom’s ayatollahs. In particular—and Nasser Moghadam quickly suspected this was the true reason for his selection—Sharif-Emami was the same man whom Ayatollah Shariatmadari had urged on the shah for months as Amouzegar’s replacement.

In the view of the SAVAK chief, if there had ever been reason to play to Shariatmadari, that time had come and gone, frittered away somewhere between the shah’s procrastinations of early summer and the fires of Cinema Rex. But how to convince the king of this?

Moghadam tried to do so at that meeting of the inner circle on August 25—but only to a degree. He didn’t enjoy anywhere near the rapport with the king as that achieved by Asadollah Alam, now four months dead, and as a career military man he was acutely mindful of the imperial chain of command; in the presence of others, he wasn’t about to address the shahanshah in a way that might come off as disrespectful or admonishing. Upon leaving the conference, however, the SAVAK chief happened to find the queen’s chief of staff, a middle-aged academic named Houchang Nahavandi, waiting in an anteroom.

“He seemed agitated,” Nahavandi recalled, “and asked me if I could arrange an interview for him with the Shahbanou. He wanted to speak to her right away.”

After putting a call through to the queen, Nahavandi and Moghadam were quickly ushered into her private office. There, according to Nahavandi, the SAVAK chief begged the empress to intercede with her husband.

In Moghadam’s view, Sharif-Emami’s appointment would be not only catastrophic but “the worst which could possibly be made at this critical juncture in the nation’s future…. He will lead us straight into the abyss.” Yet there was still time to forestall disaster. “Please, Your Majesty,” he pleaded, “persuade the shahanshah to reconsider.”

Moved by Moghadam’s obvious distress, the queen called her husband. “Your chief of SAVAK is here with me,” she told him. “He asks me to throw myself at your feet to implore you not to appoint Mr. Sharif-Emami head of government. He has a terrible reputation, he says, and to make him prime minister is the most dangerous thing you could do at this time.”

It was an extraordinary moment. In the imperial court he had created, even the shah’s wife did not question his judgment in such a manner, and most certainly not in the presence of others, and for the next several minutes Farah Pahlavi calmly held the telephone receiver to her ear and absorbed her husband’s angry response. She then set the receiver back on its hook and looked to Moghadam: “I’m sorry, there’s nothing more that can be done.”

Upon leaving her office, the distraught general turned on Nahavandi. Predicting full-scale insurrection within two months if Sharif-Emami’s appointment went forward, he implored Nahavandi to keep pressuring the queen to push for a reversal. Nahavandi hardly needed to do so, for when he returned to the office, the shahbanou was again on the phone with her husband, again trying to dissuade him from his decision. This effort, too, ended in failure. “There’s nothing to be done,” she told her chief of staff upon hanging up a second time, “nothing at all. He’s made up his mind.”

Thinking back on that conversation nearly half a century later, Pahlavi grew both gloomy and philosophical. “One can see it was a turning point, that General Moghadam was absolutely right. But what could we have done? Could I have done something more?” She pondered for a moment, then answered her own question. “No. I knew my husband. It was decided.”

* * *

Shortly before noon on August 28, 1978, the limousine carrying Ambassador William Sullivan passed through the ornamental wrought-iron gates of the Niavaran palace compound and made for the shah’s personal office in the Jahan Nama complex. It had been more than two months since the two men had last met, not since late June when both were preparing to depart Tehran for their respective summer vacations, and of all the changes that had occurred in Iran in the ambassador’s absence, nothing so shocked him as the shah’s appearance that morning. At their last meeting, the king had been buoyant and sharp, as hyper-focused as ever. On August 28, Sullivan found him tense and dispirited, thin to the point of gauntness. Most alarming was his speech. “There were unaccustomed gaps in his conversation, when he would gaze off into space,” Sullivan reported back to Washington in a secret cable. “He appeared tired and affected an almost fatalistic view about his and his country’s future.”

When Sullivan had arrived back in Tehran six days earlier, he found a confidential situation report waiting for him. Written by the embassy’s acting political affairs officer, the memo was both bracing and tinged with gallows humor. “While you were away,” it began, “the place really didn’t turn to crap, but it might have looked like it.”

Just three days after the Cinema Rex fire, the political officer had picked up on a groundswell of deepening popular anger with the regime. Undoubtedly much of this stemmed from its ham-fisted response to the Abadan tragedy, its signature blend of ineptitude and callousness, but the ire seemed to speak to a deeper frustration, a collective sense that the state, having been afforded a long respite by the opposition, had frittered away its chance to embark on a true course correction. Joined to this was a hardening anti-Western—especially anti-American—sentiment, rather to be expected in light of the continuing shortcomings of “the American shah.”

On the positive side, at the time the memo was written, the Rex horror appeared to have a chastening effect on all but the most militant of antigovernment protesters. It had also more plainly laid bare the rift between the kingdom’s principal dueling ayatollahs, Shariatmadari and Khomeini, with Khomeini’s continued silence on the tragedy—he’d yet to accuse the government of starting the fire—increasingly alienating Iranian moderates. But as was always the case in Shiite Iran, by the time of Sullivan’s return another religious anniversary, meaning another potential flash point, fast approached. This time it was the cluster of “mourning days” beginning on August 24 and climaxing on the twenty-sixth in commemoration of the death of Imam Ali, the Prophet’s son-in-law and first follower, in AD 661. As the political officer had concluded in his August 22 memo to the ambassador, “You could have a busy weekend ahead.”

That had proved an understatement. From Abadan came reports that in the continuing funeral ceremonies for the Rex victims, mourners were interspersing their prayers for the deceased with chants of “death to the shah” and “burn the Pahlavis.” While largely peaceful, the nationwide religious processions commemorating Imam Ali’s death were massive and heavily tinged with an anti-regime spirit. Simultaneously, rumors had swirled through official Tehran that the shah was about to sack Prime Minister Amouzegar, rumors confirmed on August 27 when Jaafar Sharif-Emami took the oath of office at a hastily arranged ceremony.

Even to the blinkered officials at the American embassy, it was immediately apparent this political shake-up elicited little public enthusiasm. While most Iranians were surely gratified by Sharif-Emami’s announcement that the recently imposed imperial calendar was being discarded in favor of the traditional Islamic one, his vow to ruthlessly root out governmental corruption was a bit jarring coming from someone accused of fabulously enriching himself in various government posts over the decades. Similarly, his edict ordering the immediate closure of Iran’s casinos, while pleasing to the pious, lost some of its luster when it was recalled that most such gambling outlets operated under the aegis of the Pahlavi Foundation, an institution Sharif-Emami had headed until just days earlier. As the empress Farah drily noted in her memoir, the new prime minister was unlikely to inspire confidence when “his first declaration to the country was to say that he was no longer the ‘Sharif-Emami of old.’ ”

At least as troublesome to American officials was the new prime minister’s blatant play to the nation’s religious conservatives and the backpedaling from the more progressive society the shah professed to be building. In swift order, Sharif-Emami announced the dissolution of the Ministry of Women Affairs, to be replaced by the Ministry of Religious Affairs, and, as demanded by the nation’s clerics, a purge of non-Muslim officials from the upper reaches of government. This initiative led to at least one unseemly moment when, on the afternoon of August 27, the new prime minister gathered his cabinet in the grand reception hall of Niavaran to be formally presented to the shah. Just before the ceremony got under way, Sharif-Emami went into whispered conference with his new minister of post and telecommunications, whereupon the latter hastily gathered up his belongings and departed. It seems stories had surfaced that the man was a Bahai, and whether true or not, this was reason enough for his immediate banishment.

One eyewitness to this spectacle was Houchang Nahavandi, the queen’s chief of staff and the new minister of science. “Although I hardly knew the man and never saw him again,” Nahavandi wrote of the dismissed would-be minister, “I often find myself imagining the humiliation, resentment and, no doubt, rebelliousness, he must have felt as he left the palace, like a miscreant in the eyes of the world.”

Perhaps humiliation, but perhaps also a large dose of relief, for the chief distinguishing characteristic of the new Iranian cabinet was the profound reluctance of most of its members to join. This extended to Nahavandi, who had all but begged both the shah and the shahbanou to be excluded, while some of his more desperate colleagues had even gone into hiding, fleeing for the provinces or Tehran hideaways, only to be rounded up by palace guards and frog-marched to Niavaran. Joining in the spirit of the moment, during the investiture ceremony the shah perfunctorily passed along the line of new cabinet members, drawn up to one side of the reception hall like so many soldiers on review, and couldn’t even be bothered to summon his official photographer for the occasion. “Usually, he said a few words to each new minister, outlining his priorities,” Nahavandi recalled. “This time, he contented himself with shaking hands and saying simply to each one, ‘You know what you have to do.’ Then he wished everyone good luck and withdrew.”

It was the following morning that Ambassador Sullivan rode up the hill and into the Niavaran compound for his audience with the shah.

If anything, the King of Kings seemed to have grown even more gloomy in the interim. As he told the American envoy, he remained committed to holding free parliamentary elections the following summer, as he had repeatedly promised, but had little confidence that “truly competent people” would step forward to serve; instead, it would be the usual “old worms.” While asserting that he had chosen Sharif-Emami because he was the only politician capable of mollifying “these priests,” he professed little hope he would actually succeed.

To Sullivan, one of the more disturbing aspects of their talk that day—certainly the most annoying—was the shah’s resurrection of the “made-in-America” charge in tracing the origins of his current troubles. He did so with his usual “some people are saying” rhetorical device, contending that “many people believe” the United States was secretly driving the destabilization effort. As the ambassador sardonically noted in a cable to Washington after the meeting, when he pressed for evidence to support this, the shah “hastened to say that there were no—repeat no—specific accusations, merely the vague mental doubts of the average Iranian.”

But the shah’s grim manner and outlook in those critical last days of August might have reflected something deeper: a dawning awareness of the elaborate trap he had built for himself, a snare that already appeared to offer few paths of escape.

Over his thirty-seven years on the throne, Mohammad Reza Pahlavi had bombarded his people with the message that he was the fount of all good things, the builder of hospitals and schools, the dispenser of land titles and washing machines. While the ultimate success of that inculcation process was open to debate, what had demonstrably not worked was his parallel effort to inoculate himself from blame when things went wrong, to offer up fall guys—and the occasional fall woman—when bridges collapsed or inflation ran rampant. Taken to its ultimate conclusion, for a sizable portion of the Iranian people it mattered less whether an atrocity like the Cinema Rex fire had been perpetrated by religious zealots or communist agitators or SAVAK agents than that the tragedy had been made worse by the flaws of a society that was the shah’s creation. Similarly, even the most naive Iranian wasn’t about to believe the Sharif-Emami government enjoyed “complete freedom of action,” as the shah insisted. To the contrary, all were convinced that, just like the thirty-odd administrations that had preceded it since 1941, this latest one was nothing more than a mouthpiece and foil for the King of Kings.

And how to overcome the fact that for thirty-seven years this was a regime that had both constantly lied to its people and, whenever pressed, stalled for time? Why wouldn’t a ruler who falsely proclaimed lineage to the Prophet Mohammed, a fiction that had been a source of derision among Iranians for decades, also approve a deadly fire he could blame on his enemies? Why believe a king whose periodic pronouncements of coming democratization had so often presaged new cycles of political repression? Perhaps most self-injurious of all in this regard by the summer of 1978, why believe anything coming from a regime that continued to assert its opponents were led by foreign saboteurs when this was demonstrably false to every Iranian who knew someone who’d joined the protests?

But over the course of his reign the shah had also erected something that, from the standpoint of trying to extricate himself from his current predicament, bode far worse. While residing firmly at its center, the shah had created around him a vast zero-sum power structure where any one person’s gain was another’s direct loss, a political shark tank in which all players were keenly attuned to the smell of blood in the water and poised to attack. The shah’s problem at the end of August 1978 was that his enemies were already picking up two new scents in the water: Sharif-Emami’s and, by inevitable extension, that of the man standing behind him.

The difficulties Sharif-Emami had experienced in trying to form a government continued in the days after the investiture ceremony. Into early September, one opposition figure after another publicly announced their intention to stand in the parliamentary elections scheduled for the following summer while stoutly refusing to work with the new administration in the meantime. Even friends and colleagues of Sharif-Emami’s from his many years heading the Iranian Senate hurried to put distance between them. Particularly nuanced, not to say cowardly, was the posture of Ayatollah Mohammad Kazem Shariatmadari. Having urged Sharif-Emami on the shah’s intermediaries, the ayatollah now presented a new set of demands before he would consider lending his full support; as a first litmus test, he submitted a list of Bahai officials to be purged. While opining that the new government should be afforded three months to institute reforms, Shariatmadari also publicly insisted that no differences existed between himself and Ruhollah Khomeini, a statement hard to reconcile with Khomeini’s insistence that the new administration was illegitimate and must be destroyed. Nevertheless, the ayatollah from Tabriz was to play a crucial role in the events of that late summer—and from the vantage point of both the shah and his new prime minister, a quite disastrous one.

To prove the new government’s fidelity to both political reform and religious freedom, Shariatmadari and his intermediaries immediately began pressing Sharif-Emami to allow unrestricted religious processions on the occasion of Eid, the day marking the end of the Ramadan month of fasting. While the Eid processions were normally a festive occasion, Iranian authorities had contemplated banning them in 1978, or at least severely restricting them, in light of the civil unrest that had attached to religious ceremonies all year. With precious little time to prepare—in 1978, Eid fell on September 4—Sharif-Emami fashioned a delicate compromise as a concession to Shariatmadari: So long as the Eid marchers remained peaceful and apolitical, police and army units would stay to side streets and allow the processions to proceed unhindered.

The Eid celebrations of 1978 represented another watershed moment in the course of the Iranian Revolution—although in a manner few might have predicted. In towns and cities throughout Iran, millions of the faithful took to the streets in both nonviolent and highly orderly fashion. In Tehran alone, an estimated half a million marched through the city center and, upon encountering police or army units, greeted them with flowers and embraces rather than epithets and stones. Also different were their chants, no longer the incendiary “Death to the shah!” but more plaintive appeals directed at the security forces themselves. One popular call that day: “Soldiers, we give you flowers, you give us bullets.”

In a story rife with ironies, the 1978 Eid celebrations posed several new ones. Across the breadth of Iran came reports of uniformly peaceful marches—even very young children took part—causing many of the regime’s more moderate clerical opponents to perceive themselves as in the ascendancy and the extreme militancy propounded by the likes of Khomeini falling from favor. This perception also had the effect of calming the secular opposition, which had increasingly blanched at all the talk of an Islamic state by the most conservative religious figures. In the days after Eid, a number of secular opposition figures announced common cause with their more moderate religious fellow travelers, the first stirrings toward the forming of a united front against the state. Simultaneously, the Eid marches disabused the shah of the notion that the strife stemmed from the actions of others. As noted by Andrew Scott Cooper, a Pahlavi biographer, “It was on Eid that the shah finally accepted that the anger of opposition was directed at him, that he couldn’t palm it off on government ministers. The day of Eid changed everything.”

It also raised a wholly new danger for the King of Kings, the prospect that, rather than confront his soldiers and policemen with rocks and Molotov cocktails, his opponents might cajole them into submission. If the situation spiraled down further, or if the opposition marches grew even larger, how long would the nation’s soldiers, most of them not professionals but seventeen- and eighteen-year-old conscripts, resist the importuning of the mobs to stand down and join them?

The crown’s opponents seemed to ask themselves this same question, for on the following day, September 5, the crowds that took to Iran’s streets—less in religious celebration now than in overt political protest—were nearly as large as those on Eid. The phenomenon was replicated on September 6. Quite suddenly it appeared the country might simply grind to a halt, that with the regime’s opponents in command of the streets and both the nation’s economy and its security forces paralyzed, the existing order might just crumble away. So perilous was the situation that on that same evening of September 6, Iran’s top generals met in secret conference with the shah and urged him to declare martial law.

As was his wont, the king once again looked for someone else to take action. That task fell to Sharif-Emami. That evening, the new prime minister, in office for all of ten days, took to the national airwaves to throw down the gauntlet. While he resisted the generals’ call for martial law, from that moment on, he warned, public marches would require prior official approval; since no permits had been granted for the following day, any such marches would be deemed illegal and subject to disbanding by force.

The national response was one of utter defiance. In towns and cities across Iran on September 7, the people marched, contemptuously flouting the state’s edict, their calls grown far more strident. A fundamental line had been crossed, and with his administration’s very credibility on the line, Sharif-Emami called an emergency meeting of his cabinet that evening. Joining that meeting were the nation’s senior military commanders, and this time they all but demanded martial law be declared. Once again, the shah tried to shirk responsibility for what was to come, but it was impossible; by laws he himself had promulgated, only the king could order martial law, which he finally did in the late hours of that night.

For an institution that so many Iranians believed controlled the very heartbeat of their nation, the American embassy on Takht-e-Jamshid Avenue remained remarkably oblivious to the deepening drama taking place around it. At the morning staff meeting on September 6, the same day that Iran’s senior generals first urged the imposition of martial law, the embassy’s chief security officer warned of the possibility of increased tensions on the following day, but deemed them insufficient to cancel the chili cookout planned for the embassy lawn. Ambassador Sullivan concurred with this but suggested that perhaps the ladies’ club tour of Tehran’s central bazaar, scheduled for the afternoon of September 7, be postponed. In none of the embassy cable traffic of that day or the next was there the slightest indication that any American official knew martial law was about to be imposed.

That news was broadcast to the nation at 6:00 a.m. on September 8. Mirroring the shah’s own behavior of recent weeks, the announcement was a curious blend of petulance, delusion and aggrievement. While noting that the previous day’s illegal marches had “disrupted the activities of everyday life and frightened the people,” the edict offered that the state had magnanimously let them proceed in order to avoid bloodshed. But no more. “The plot,” the statement charged, “which is financed and masterminded by outside forces, is increasing in dimension every day; is endangering every individual’s rights; is against the freedom and independence of this nation; and is aimed at disrupting Iran’s progress and government.” For that reason, the regime was imposing martial law in Tehran and eleven other Iranian cities for the next six months.

In light of what was about to transpire, many of those who attended the crucial cabinet meeting on the night of September 7 later insisted that they raised concerns about the timing of the martial law decree, that they argued for a delay so as to allow for the news to disseminate. If those concerns were truly broached, they were ignored. As the government’s broadcast made clear, martial law was to go into effect at 9:00 that morning—in a mere three hours.

Chapter 11

With the passage of nearly half a century, it’s impossible to establish what happened in Tehran’s Jaleh Square on the morning of Friday, September 8, 1978, with any degree of certainty. Then again, it was quite impossible to do so mere hours later.

This much is known: In the early hours of that morning, groups of antigovernment protesters began gathering at several different meeting points in the neighborhoods of south Tehran. At about 9:00 a.m., they started walking north, toward the city center. The route of one of these groups, numbering somewhere between two thousand and five thousand, took them into an area just south of downtown known as Jaleh Square. This was not really a square at all, but rather a traffic roundabout at the intersection of several streets, and fronted by commercial buildings and apartment complexes of four and five stories. There the marchers were met by a line of soldiers holding carbines and flanked by at least two armored personnel carriers. As the protesters approached, an army officer with a bullhorn informed them that they were in violation of the martial law decree issued at 6:00 that morning and ordered them to disperse. The marchers did not do so. Instead, whether out of defiance or because the continuing advance of those behind made dispersal impossible, many of those in the vanguard sat down in the street, distant from the line of soldiers by perhaps forty or fifty feet. When the commanding officer again ordered them to disperse, some protesters began taunting his soldiers and drawing closer. As they did so, the soldiers grew visibly more anxious and instinctively started drawing into small, self-protective clusters with their rifles raised.

And then something happened. Perhaps a car backfired, or a demonstrator drew too close, or a panicked soldier squeezed a little too tightly on a trigger, but then a shot rang out, followed swiftly by several more. In the next instant, the spattering of gunshots became a veritable cascade, and the soldiers’ bullets were being fired not into the air as a warning but directly into the mass of unarmed protesters sitting or standing just before them. In the face of that fusillade, many marchers scrambled in search of safety, tripping and falling over one another as they went, but there were also those who stoically remained sitting or even advanced on the soldiers and shouted their willingness to become shahids until the bullets found them and granted their wish. By the time the shooting slackened and then trailed to a stop—not the fifteen minutes some would remember, probably more like ninety seconds—so many wounded lay among the dead that eyewitnesses would talk of Jaleh Square taking on a strange crawling effect, as if the street itself were some great, slowly dying animal.

Beyond this, mythology and falsehoods and propaganda took over. The soldiers in Jaleh Square that morning were not Israeli mercenaries, as some in the opposition would later insist, but there’s no evidence those soldiers were first fired upon by snipers in surrounding buildings, as the regime would claim. The shah did not personally direct the slaughter from a hovering helicopter gunship—the king didn’t leave the Niavaran compound that morning—but it’s also not true that seventy soldiers were killed at the hands of the protesters. Also dubious is the claim, blithely repeated by many historians, that the demonstrators were somehow unaware of the martial law decree; it simply strains credulity to believe that none among the thousands assembled had bothered to turn on a television or listen to the radio in the preceding three hours. And as would happen again and again in this revolution, there instantly began the duel over the number of the day’s casualties: surely not the 86 dead and 242 wounded that the state initially announced, but even more definitely not the three to four thousand dead that some in the opposition claimed. Among the few truly neutral observers on the scene, either medical personnel or foreign journalists, a consensus developed that between Jaleh Square and several other violent flash points in Tehran that day, somewhere between two hundred and three hundred were killed. The specific number didn’t much matter, of course: September 8, or Black Friday as it was soon to become known to generations of Iranians, was by far the bloodiest day in the months of unrest that had preceded it and marked the advent of a grim new chapter in the revolution.

No one seemed more shaken by the events of that Friday than the King of Kings. The next morning, he was interviewed by Strobe Talbott, a Time magazine reporter. Talbott had met the shah a number of times previously and was stunned by the change in his appearance; as he confided to an American embassy official, the king looked awful and had the manner of “a shattered man who appeared to be on the brink of a nervous collapse.” At one point, after a long, self-pitying monologue from the shah, Talbott asked if he had considered abdicating in favor of his son Crown Prince Reza. The question would normally have drawn the shah’s umbrage, but this time he went quiet for a long moment before replying, “For me to do that would be easy. I would like to wave goodbye but…that would be a catastrophe.” So gloomy was their meeting that the journalist, groping for a question that might elicit a halfway-positive response, commented that at least the new nightly curfew seemed to be holding. To this, the shah shrugged: “It’s too early to tell.”

In the bewildering world the Iranian imperial court had become, however, a far more upbeat shah greeted Ambassador Sullivan the very next day, still shaken by the bloody turn of events in Jaleh Square but at least not the semi-catatonic figure Talbott had encountered. One reason for the king’s improved mood undoubtedly had to do with the army. Like military men everywhere, Iran’s generals desired unambiguous orders, and notwithstanding the dark turn of events in Jaleh Square the martial law declaration finally gave them that. Indeed, that declaration had led to an instant boost in morale throughout the armed forces and fairly put to rest the growing fear of just a few days earlier of a collapse among the lower ranks. Still, the American ambassador was sufficiently alarmed by the shah’s state of mind at their September 10 meeting to return to an issue that had been bandied about ever since his return to Iran three weeks earlier.

Rather like the jealous lover who demands constant reassurance of his partner’s loyalty, joined to the shah’s insinuations of American treachery was his unceasing need for American affirmation—specifically, in the form of praise and compliments from President Carter. It didn’t require a particularly agile mind to see how self-destructive this compulsion was given the shah’s current situation, how such tributes played perfectly into the opposition’s portrayal of him as an American lackey, but it was almost as if the King of Kings couldn’t help himself. Within days of Sullivan’s return to Tehran in late August, the shah and his minions had begun floating the idea of Carter’s delivering a full-throated public endorsement of the monarch, and naturally Sullivan’s suggestion that this might not be such a grand idea served only to alarm and cause the court to push for it even more. Thus hemmed in, Sullivan had reluctantly worked up a letter of support to go out on Carter’s signature, but in the wake of Black Friday he reconsidered. Far better, in the view of the ambassador and his advisors, would be to keep things low-key and have the president simply give the shah a brief—and most important, private—pep talk over the phone. Even before Sullivan journeyed to the palace, the American embassy had begun coordinating with the White House on when such a call might be arranged.

But in what was to become a bizarre recurring pattern in the months ahead, it so happened that President Carter was thoroughly preoccupied with other pressing matters on that crucial second weekend in September. Just days earlier, his many months of trying to fashion an Arab-Israeli peace settlement had culminated in the Israeli prime minister, Menachem Begin, and the Egyptian president, Anwar Sadat, joining him at the Camp David presidential retreat, there to embark on a novel plan of staying isolated in the Maryland mountains until they came up with a blueprint for peace. At the time of the Jaleh Square massacre, the three heads of state had just concluded their second full day of negotiations.

As the details of Black Friday filtered in, Anwar Sadat, the shah’s closest ally in the Arab world, finally broke away from the peace talks to put a consolation call through to the shah. He was sufficiently alarmed by the king’s tone to lend his voice to Sullivan’s suggestion that the president deliver a morale-boosting message of his own. The task of fashioning that message fell to Henry Precht, the director of the Iran desk at the State Department.

As Precht soon discovered, striking the right tone was surprisingly tricky. “I said, ‘It seems to me that we have to support him,’ ” Precht recalled. “ ‘We can’t turn our back on him. But, we have to say something that indicates we understand the situation in Iran. And the message should be very brief.’ I can’t remember whether I dictated it over the phone or how that worked out, but in one paragraph we restated our firm support of the Shah, while also encouraging that the king’s liberalization efforts was the best path forward.”

Taking a brief break from his talks with Begin and Sadat, on the morning of September 10—4:00 p.m. in Tehran—Carter stepped into the Camp David communications room as a secure call was put through to Niavaran Palace. As is customary with presidential phone calls, at least one White House aide was entrusted to listen in on the conversation and take notes. For Carter’s call to the shah, the aide selected was the National Security Council officer Gary Sick, patched in from his office at the White House annex.

“It was a strange call,” Sick recalled, “and a somewhat awkward one. Iran clearly wasn’t foremost in the president’s mind—he was preoccupied with the talks he was having at Camp David—and it probably showed. At the same time, the shah sounded as if he were tranquilized, just very distant, and spoke in this low monotone. He seemed absolutely stunned by what had happened. The president offered his condolences, but it was not a long call—perhaps all of six minutes—and I don’t think the president, with so many other things on his mind at that moment, really appreciated the full import of what had happened.”

His quick call to the shah finished, the president returned to his arm-twisting and cajoling of the Israeli and Egyptian heads of state and probably didn’t think about Iran again for many days. In fact, even in the wake of Black Friday, Iran was to remain so far down the list of Carter’s foreign policy concerns that his first National Security Council meeting devoted to the crisis there was still a full two months away.

Far sooner than that, though, there was to be another indication that the shah, normally a consummate strategist, wasn’t thinking very clearly. Within hours of his conversation with Carter, he had his minions release a transcript to the Iranian media, repeating the praise and support the American president had offered. In publicizing the message, the shah committed a double act of self-sabotage, both buttressing the opposition’s characterization of him as an American puppet and further fueling popular rage against his chief ally. “What it said to the people in the streets,” Precht explained, “was that the Americans were standing behind the shah, supporting his shooting of the people in Jaleh Square.”

But it wasn’t only the shah who failed to properly read the situation; even at this late hour there came from both Washington and official Tehran those moments of delusion that, in different circumstances, might have been comical.

On the weekend after the Jaleh Square massacre, Tehran played host to the annual conference of the World Association of Girl Guides and Girl Scouts (WAGGGS). Attendees of that conference competed for hotel rooms with the businessmen who were flooding the Iranian capital for the sixth annual Tehran International Trade Fair. At about the same time, Ambassador Sullivan received a cable from State Department headquarters urging him to take up a serious matter with senior Iranian officials “at an early date.” The issue in question was a congressional subcommittee investigation into the domestic activities of SAVAK, specifically on whether the security agency had illegally surveilled Iranian dissidents within the United States or had lent financial support to the pro-shah counterdemonstrators during the shah’s visit to Washington the previous year. As the cable writer pointed out, an exposé on SAVAK’s activities in the United States was about to be published by New York magazine, and “we owe it to our relationship with the Iranians to initiate a frank discussion on this issue.”

An incredulous Sullivan fired back a frosty riposte the next day: “Perhaps our reporting cables have not made clear the atmosphere of crisis which currently exists in Tehran and the total preoccupation of the Iranian leadership with the prevention of violent explosions.” To wit, the ambassador concluded, “It would be impossible to attract their serious attention to this particular problem at this juncture.”

Of course, it might also be argued that the ambassador had helped fuel this element of unreality by his continually sunny declarations on the state of affairs in Iran, his firm insistence during his meetings in Washington that the shah had everything under control.

Yet even after Black Friday, the essential complacency of American policy toward Iran didn’t change. From senior officials in Washington, to Ambassador Sullivan in Tehran, and on to the lowliest foreign service officer in the field, almost everyone remained fully confident that the shah would still ride out his current difficulties. Undergirding this confidence was the fact that with the world’s fifth-largest military and a vast internal security agency the shah clearly possessed the means to quell the forces of dissent whenever he saw fit. The core question wasn’t whether the King of Kings would survive, but rather how many might die for him to do so.

Yet as it turned out, this wasn’t really the core question at all. Instead, it was one that very few officials in either Tehran or Washington thought to ask themselves: Did the shah actually have the will to use the forces at his disposal? In a fight between him and his own people, would he order the deaths of thousands—perhaps tens of thousands—and if so, was there a point where the Iranian army would recoil from machine-gunning its own people?

By all indications, the first American official to ponder these questions was the State Department’s Henry Precht. The answer he arrived at was a bracing one. “The day after the [Jaleh Square] massacre,” he recalled, “I was taking my morning shower and the thought came to me that the Shah was indeed finished. This was a war between him and his people and he could not prevail in such a war. When he went and how he went I didn’t know. Whether he would be able to make some compromise that would diminish his powers, I didn’t know. But it was clear to me that the Iran of the future was not going to be the Iran of the past.”

When this epiphany came to him, Precht was acutely aware that it was a view shared by absolutely no one else in the American government, and most certainly not by the man he perceived as spearheading Iranian policy, the president’s national security advisor, Zbigniew Brzezinski. He further realized—or at least so he later rationalized—that if he were to abruptly air his newfound beliefs, the most likely result would be not a wholesale reappraisal of American policy toward Iran but rather his own quick demotion to some State Department Siberia where his defeatist attitudes could do no harm. “So, I thought I would just have to play this slowly and at the margins,” he explained. “I would have to try to modify policy so that it begins to conform to what my conception of the reality was, not to confront it head-on and end up bringing myself down while not changing the policy.”

If that explanation carries a hint of careerism—in 1978, Henry Precht was on track to be awarded an ambassadorship in the near future, and the State Department rarely rewarded bomb throwers—this hint became rather more overt when, the day after that fateful shower, Precht was asked to fashion Carter’s message of unwavering support for the shah. Rather than voice his newfound reservations, the Iran desk director dutifully did so.

Precht had yet to find “the margins” to operate in when, two weeks later, he was called to Capitol Hill to report on the latest developments in Iran before a congressional subcommittee. Joining him at that hearing was Jack Miklos, Precht’s predecessor on the Iran desk and the shah’s greatest supporter at State. As to be expected, Miklos spoke in glowing terms of the king’s intelligence and durability and insisted his current difficulties were a mere blip in his long and glorious and American-friendly reign. Despite his own grave misgivings, Henry Precht seconded that view. “The shah,” he told legislators, “is as much in control as he has ever been.”

* * *

Until the evening of September 16, 1978, the ancient settlement of Tabas had largely managed to escape the trials inflicted on so many other Iranian towns and cities over the centuries. Much of this was thanks to its remoteness. Standing at the edge of Iran’s eastern Khorasan province and a vast desert extending all the way to Afghanistan, Tabas lay some two hundred miles away from any major population center, so off the beaten path that even Genghis Khan’s marauders couldn’t be bothered to make the detour necessary to destroy it. As a result, the town and its environs were home to a number of remarkably intact sites of historical significance—a uniquely designed seven-hundred-year-old dam, a fourteen-hundred-year-old citadel—that, in the decade prior to 1978, drew fairly frequent visits by the empress Farah in her campaign to preserve the kingdom’s most important cultural landmarks.

But there were two other features of Tabas that all but foreordained the tragedy that ultimately befell it. The first stemmed from the construction of its houses. As in much of rural Iran, even in 1978 the walls of most homes consisted of bricks of dried mud covered with a thin layer of stucco, with very little in the way of mortar to lend stability. Atop these walls, a flat roof, similarly made of dried mud, was held in place by a crosshatch of reed thatching and a few thin wooden poles. While such construction is prone to collapse in the most stable of environments, Tabas’s second problematic feature was that it lay directly beside one of the great tectonic plates that crisscross Iran and make it one of the most earthquake-prone lands on earth.

Shortly after 7:00 p.m. on September 16, 1978, Khorasan was struck by an earthquake measuring 7.4 on the Richter scale, its epicenter fifteen miles from Tabas. In an instant, almost every home in the town pancaked in on itself, killing some twelve thousand, or 80 percent, of its residents. To this toll was added at least four thousand more dead in the surrounding villages. By contrast, the seven-hundred-year-old Abbasi dam, on the town’s outskirts and built of hand-cut stone, was barely damaged.

Depending on local vagaries, rescuers typically have a window of between twenty-four and seventy-two hours to rescue those trapped in ruins after an earthquake, with the chances of finding anyone alive after this window rapidly dwindling. With time of such essence, offers of emergency humanitarian assistance are routinely extended by the governments of surrounding nations, even normally hostile ones. As the magnitude of the Tabas tragedy became evident, almost every nation bordering on Iran offered immediate help, as did the United States, Great Britain and France. The Iranian government politely turned down all these offers, insisting it had both the equipment and the ability to deal with the calamity on its own.

As is often the case with major natural disasters, this assessment proved in error. Although the Iranian air force swiftly launched a massive relief operation into Khorasan, hauling in rescue workers and emergency supplies aboard C-130 transport planes, the logistics of getting this help to where it was needed was hampered by collapsed buildings, severed roads and a lack of local transport. And as is also common with disaster relief efforts around the world, in Tabas local ad hoc rescue teams were often far quicker and more efficient in reaching people and distributing aid than the designated authorities. In Khorasan province, much of this localized effort was coordinated and carried out by the Islamic Red Crescent Society and by some two thousand Islamic seminary student volunteers bused down from the holy city of Mashhad, three hundred miles to the north. By the afternoon of September 17, these religious groups were already erecting tent cities and rudimentary field clinics on the outskirts of Tabas, while much of the government’s personnel and supplies remained marooned at regional airfields.

Having learned their lesson from the Rex fire, the shah and shahbanou understood that they must personally visit the disaster zone. With criticism of the official relief effort mounting, and the increasingly desperate survivors in Khorasan likely to make for some awkward optics, it was decided the queen should visit first. She flew into Tabas on September 18.

In her past visits to Tabas, Queen Farah had always been greeted by rapturous crowds. This time, along with the grief-stricken and benumbed were those who posed angry and pointed questions. How was it that the mullahs and seminary students from Mashhad were doing a better job of helping people than the shah’s vaunted world-class army? In the “new France” the shahanshah promised, how could it be that those living in the Iranian countryside remained so neglected that fifteen or twenty-five thousand of them—no one would ever know the true number—could be crushed to death in their flimsy mud hovels? Just as at the ceremony at the Reza Shah shrine the previous year, the queen left Tabas with the sense that something had fundamentally changed in how the Iranian people regarded her and her husband.

For his own trip to the region, the King of Kings took steps to ensure a more decorous reception. Clad in his field marshal’s uniform, he choppered into Tabas two days later but reportedly never left the airfield. Instead, as a screened crowd of loyalists gathered close, he climbed behind the wheel of a stationary jeep, enabling his royal photographers to capture the image of him, purportedly on an inspection tour of the area, being swarmed by well-wishers. That charade complete, he reboarded his helicopter and flew away.

But Iran was a land of conspiracy theories, and already by the time of the shah’s visit a new one was circulating about the Tabas tragedy. What had killed so many Iranians wasn’t an earthquake at all, so this story went, but rather the shock waves unleashed by a secret underground nuclear test. That test had been conducted by the Americans and approved by their lackey, the American shah. From this starting point, the rumor diverged into two competing narratives. One held that the resulting disaster was due to American incompetence, the other that it had been deliberate mass murder.

* * *

The principal border crossing between Iraq and Kuwait consists of a sprawl of low-slung office buildings and warehouses, with the Iraqi town of Safwan separated from its Kuwaiti counterpart, Abdali, by a high fence topped with concertina wire. This fence, flanked by a few decrepit watchtowers, stretches off into the scrubby desert in both directions until lost in the region’s perpetual dull-yellow haze. As dreary as the spot is today—and it is unspeakably so—in 1978 the frontier consisted of two rude collections of metal huts separated by about half a mile of no-man’s-land. Then, as now, it was the sort of place that could induce in the traveler the nagging worry of what might happen should they become stuck in that nowhere space.

On the afternoon of October 4, 1978, five men had occasion to put that worry to the test. The group had set out from the Iraqi city of Najaf, some 280 miles to the north, in a Mercedes sedan very early that morning, with plans to reach Kuwait City by midday. The plan hit a snag when, having cleared the Iraqi frontier, they were stopped on the Kuwait side; authorities there had a problem with the eldest member of the group, a Shiite cleric in his seventies. Barred from entering Kuwait, the group returned to the Iraqi border post, only to be denied reentry there. Instead, the five were led to a small holding room at the Iraqi frontier, where they spent the rest of the day waiting as senior officials in several different regional capitals pondered their fate. The reason for such high-level attention was that the problematic old man was Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. His companions were his thirty-two-year-old son, Ahmad, two Najaf-based clerics, and Dr. Ebrahim Yazdi.

The events that brought the five to the Safwan holding room had been set in motion some two weeks earlier. For most of the thirteen years they had provided him refuge, the Iraqi government regarded Khomeini as a useful asset, a trump card to play against their imperial rival in Tehran should the need arise. By 1978, though, that view had greatly altered. Three years earlier, the two regimes had settled into a détente of sorts, punctuated by the shah’s abrupt abandonment of the rebellious Iraqi Kurds. This spirit of cooperation took on a new vitality in April 1978 when, after a bloody, Soviet-backed coup in Afghanistan, the junta in Baghdad grew increasingly wary of their erstwhile Moscow benefactor. Most of all, mindful of its own restive Shiite population, the secular Iraqi regime had come to view the religious upheavals in Iran with deepening alarm and saw that continuing to provide a platform for the hectoring old man in Najaf was a dangerous game. In late September, Baghdad let Khomeini know that it was time to either mute his anti-shah rhetoric or leave Iraq, and buttressed the point by throwing up a police security cordon around his Najaf home. Paradoxically, it was subsequent reports that Iraq had placed Khomeini under house arrest that sparked a sudden upsurge in violent street demonstrations in Iran after several weeks of relative calm. In another paradox, it was the shah himself who asked the emerging Iraqi strongman, Saddam Hussein, to lift the restrictions on Khomeini so as to calm Iranian waters. It was also around this time that Hussein, adopting the robust approach to problem-solving for which he would become famous, reportedly offered to liquidate Khomeini as a personal favor to the shah, only to have the Iranian leader demur.

Nevertheless, Khomeini understood that he had outworn his Iraqi welcome. Determined to remain in a Muslim country and to stay as close to the Iranian battlescape as possible, he and his senior aides began sounding out a number of nearby Arab nations, only to find most had no interest in hosting him at all. Rather by default then, in early October the ayatollah and his Najaf lieutenants decided to try to slip into Kuwait and from there make for the friendlier climes of Syria. At about the same time, Khomeini’s chief acolyte in the United States, Dr. Ebrahim Yazdi, was coming up with a very different plan.

“I think he had a much broader view of what needed to happen on the international level,” explained Yazdi’s son-in-law, Mehdi Noorbaksh. “Yes, of course Khomeini needed to stay in touch with the Iranian people, but he also needed to start reassuring those governments supporting the shah that a change in Iran wouldn’t be a disaster for them. Yazdi felt that the [opposition] movement had to have a Western strategy.”

The doctor in Houston was helped toward this realization by a former CIA officer named Richard Cottam. After serving in Iran during the 1953 coup against Mossadegh, Cottam had quit the agency and gone on to become one of the staunchest American critics of the shah, so much so that by the 1970s both he and his writings on Iran were essentially banned around the State Department. By the summer of 1978, with the opposition movement in Iran beginning to flourish, Cottam, then a professor at the University of Pittsburgh, began talking with Dr. Yazdi about its potential future course. Those conversations left Cottam convinced that Khomeini would prove to be both a moderate and a pragmatic alternative to the King of Kings. He also became convinced this was a message the Carter administration needed to hear; in mid-September 1978, Cottam put a call through to Gary Sick at the National Security Council, suggesting he meet with Ebrahim Yazdi.

Not that the professor at Baylor was totally sold on this overture. “I got the clear impression that Yazdi was unenthusiastic about any direct contact with the U.S. government,” Sick recalled, “but that Cottam had persuaded him to consent to a meeting if it could be done discreetly.” For his part, Sick was acutely aware of the potential for great diplomatic fallout should it come to light that an NSC official met with a Khomeini representative. In any event, once the proposal for such a meeting reached the upper tiers of the State Department, it was brusquely rejected. “Understandably, both Yazdi and Cottam felt insulted,” Sick wrote, “and concluded that their doubts about the U.S. government’s attitude toward the opposition had been amply confirmed.”

Close on the heels of that rejection, the Iraqi authorities began their campaign to isolate or be rid of Khomeini, and Yazdi realized immediate action was needed. In late September, he flew to Beirut to confer with some of the ayatollah’s other exiled advisors and decide on their next course of action.

Like Khomeini himself, most of those in Beirut were adamant that the cleric should move to another Muslim country, one where he would be treated with respect. But Yazdi had a different destination in mind: Paris. As he counseled his Beirut colleagues, in the French capital the ayatollah would have access to international telecommunications such that his messages to the Iranian people would be impossible to block. What’s more, France didn’t require a visa for Iranian nationals and was already home to a large community of Iranian expatriates; Khomeini’s followers could come and go from Paris unhindered and personally carry his instructions back to Iran. Best of all, the French capital was one of the world’s great media hubs. There, the international news media would flock to interview the ayatollah, and the story of the Iranian opposition would become constant front-page news. By contrast, in almost any Muslim country, dictatorships all, the resident regime could switch Khomeini’s media access on or off whenever it chose. As in Iraq, to go to another Muslim country meant being a pawn; counterintuitively, to go to the West and take up residence in the belly of the beast meant freedom.

Such arguments failed to sway the others in Beirut, just as they failed to sway the ayatollah when Yazdi finally reached Najaf. Their meeting nearly didn’t happen at all. Arriving in Najaf late on the night of October 3, Yazdi had been barred from reaching Khomeini’s house by Iraqi police and was instead forced to spend a restless night in the dormitory room of an adjacent mosque. Very early the next morning, he was led through a back door of the mosque to an alley where he discovered Khomeini and his companions gathered beside a small convoy of cars, about to depart for the Kuwait border. Rather at a loss for what else to do, Yazdi hastily decided to join in the journey and clambered aboard Khomeini’s Mercedes—which, of course, also meant joining the cleric in the interminable wait in the holding room at the Safwan border post.

But interminable was actually one of the better-case scenarios, for it gradually occurred to Yazdi that being stuck in no-man’s-land provided the ideal setting for Khomeini’s murder, that as long as they remained there, the secret police of Iraq or Iran or Kuwait could eliminate the ayatollah and his companions and deny all responsibility. That fear took on new resonance when, well after nightfall, senior Iraqi security officials showed up to announce they were taking Khomeini and his other three companions to a nearby hotel, but that Yazdi was to remain behind at the border. Managing to persuade a guard to let him use the telephone, the doctor put a desperate call through to his daughter and son-in-law, Mehdi Noorbaksh, in Texas.

“We were absolutely frantic,” Noorbaksh recalled, “because it seemed likely that the Iraqis might kill them all. We immediately contacted some other supporters, and for the next twelve hours between us we probably sent hundreds of telegrams: to congressmen, to human rights organizations, to just anyone we thought might be able to help. I don’t think my wife slept for two days, she was so worried her father was about to be killed.”

One of those contacted was Gary Sick at the NSC. “I got a call from Cottam, but I told him there was nothing we could do. What, we’re going to rescue the guy who’s trying to overthrow the shah? Sorry, but they’re going to have to figure this one out by themselves.”

But in such improbable settings, history is sometimes made. Early the next morning, October 5, Yazdi was taken to the Shatt al-Arab Hotel in nearby Basra, where he was reunited with Khomeini and the others. As more hours of tense waiting passed—clearly, Iraqi authorities had yet to decide what to do with them—Yazdi used the time to press the ayatollah and his son on the merits of setting up shop in Paris should they get out of their current predicament alive. One objection Khomeini raised was that he’d heard the French made their bread with lard, or pork fat, which was strictly haram in Muslim societies. It took some finessing on Yazdi’s part to assure his mentor that there were exceptions to this rule, and besides, it wasn’t as if there were a host of non-lard-based bread-producing countries clamoring for his presence. By late morning, Yazdi had largely won Ahmad Khomeini over to the French idea. Shortly after, the patriarch relented as well, but only until a more suitable haven in a Muslim nation was found.

With the Iraqi authorities thrilled to hear of this new plan, the stranded travelers were taken to the Basra airfield and flown up to Baghdad that same afternoon. After spending the night at a heavily guarded Hotel Dar es Salaam, the group was shuttled back to the Baghdad Airport early the next morning and, flanked by plainclothes Iraqi security officers, bundled into the first-class compartment of an Iraqi Airways 747 bound for Paris. During a refueling stop in Geneva, Yazdi managed to steal off the plane and put a call through to an associate, alerting him of their impending arrival in Paris, but since the Iraqi authorities omitted their names from the passenger manifest, it wasn’t until Khomeini and his entourage came off the plane at Orly that afternoon that French officials discovered who their new guest was. “I don’t know if it was Yazdi or the Iraqis who thought all that out,” explained Mehdi Noorbaksh, “but clearly the idea was to present the French with a fait accompli.”

Once through customs, the group was met by several acolytes alerted by Yazdi’s call, but so unexpected was Khomeini’s presence that no arrangements had been made as to where to take him. For lack of a better plan, he was shuttled to a supporter’s fourth-floor apartment in one of the dingy banlieue neighborhoods of southern Paris. Over the next several days, as the news of his presence spread, a steady stream of Iranian émigrés made for the apartment in Cachan, so much so that neighbors soon began complaining of the endless procession of strange robed men trooping through their hallways at all hours. More suitable accommodations were found when another devotee offered up his vacant bungalow in the village of Neauphle-le-Château, some twenty-five miles outside Paris. On October 9, Khomeini and his entourage made for the village, with the ayatollah still clinging to the hope that it would be only a temporary stop on the way to a Muslim nation.

This was the fervent hope of the French president, Giscard d’Estaing, too. Blindsided by Khomeini’s arrival, the French leader placed a frantic call to the shah, clearly concerned over the future of Franco-Iranian relations—and, no doubt, the future of French military and industrial contracts—should France provide even temporary refuge to the king’s archenemy. To d’Estaing’s great relief and surprise, the shah seemed quite unperturbed by Khomeini’s presence in France, commenting that it really made no difference where he ended up, that “he could do as much damage from Hamburg or Zurich as he could from Paris.” The monarch would soon have reason to think differently about this assessment, but in the meantime the residents of Neauphle-le-Château took to adjusting to the sight of the old man in his black turban and brown robes given to morning strolls along the surrounding country lanes. In those first few days after his arrival, before the media learned of his presence and Neauphle-le-Château became the improbable focus of the world’s attention, those who happened to encounter the Iranian holy man on his walks were most struck by his grim demeanor—he never smiled and rarely spoke—and the cheap blue plastic sandals he wore.

* * *

On an afternoon in October, Michael Metrinko was at his desk in the Tabriz consulate when he received a telephone call from a young man named Ahmet. The consul knew Ahmet quite well—he was the aide-de-camp to the general in charge of the Tabriz air force base, and they often spoke during Metrinko’s visits to the base—but there was an unusual tension in the young soldier’s voice that day. “Michael,” he said, “I have to talk to you. Can I come over?”

No sooner had Ahmet reached the American consulate than he launched into an extraordinary story.

Because it was his day off, Ahmet had been sleeping in that morning when he got a call from the base commander requesting he come to headquarters at once. When he got there, a large group of air force pilots had already gathered. “They were handing in their resignations,” Ahmet recounted. “The general wanted me to come in because he didn’t want other people to know what was happening and he trusted me, but all these pilots were resigning in protest. They said they were no longer loyal to the shah and would no longer serve in the imperial air force.”

In the surreal scene that unfolded, Ahmet took to collecting the pilots’ resignation papers, while his commander, desperate for guidance, put a call through to his counterpart at the military airfield in Shiraz. Precisely the same thing was occurring in Shiraz. The two generals held a hurried conference, and then the Tabriz commander came out to address his pilots.

“I agree with you,” he announced. “I no longer support the shah. I support Khomeini and the revolution. But let’s not resign. Let’s wait until we can take over. Stay in your jobs, because we’re going to need the planes for the revolution.”

According to Ahmet, all the pilots had agreed to this course of action and returned to their barracks. It was immediately afterward that he had called Metrinko. “I thought maybe your government would want to know about this,” he said.

Just maybe. Metrinko had long taken note of the deterioration in the government’s standing in his consular district, the growing restiveness of the population, but nothing even remotely approached the kind of situation he was hearing from Ahmet. “The air force was the shah’s baby,” Metrinko explained, “the branch of the service that got everything it wanted—and I mean, everything—so if these guys were talking about mutinying…”

Taking leave of Ahmet, Metrinko put an urgent call through to the communications room at the embassy in Tehran.

One of the most secure means of sending an encrypted message is a system known as the onetime pad, consisting of a unique cryptogram that is used just once and for which only the sender and recipient have access to the deciphering key. Since onetime pads are cumbersome and time-consuming both to create and to decode, they tend to be used only in extremely sensitive situations—certainly Michael Metrinko had never employed them in the past—but that changed with the story off the Tabriz air base. When the duty officer in the embassy code room finally deciphered Metrinko’s message, he had a two-word response: “Holy shit.”

It was a Friday, the second day of the Iranian weekend, so the embassy was largely shut down. By chance, though, most of its senior-ranking officials—the ambassador, the deputy chief of mission and the Military Assistance Advisory Group commander, Major General Philip Gast—were whiling away the afternoon in a poker game at the ambassador’s residence when Metrinko’s message came in. Having already pegged Metrinko as an alarmist from his past reporting, Ambassador Sullivan was immediately skeptical but, recalling that a group of American military advisors were stationed on the Tabriz air base, turned to General Gast. “Why don’t you call your people up there and see if any of this is true.”

To partly compensate for their isolated posting, the MAAG advisors billeted in Tabriz had been permitted to open a small bar on base. It was operated by a sergeant named Harry, and it was to Harry’s Bar that the MAAG commander placed his call.

“Harry, this is General Gast,” he said. “The American consul in Tabriz has just told us there was a mass resignation of all the pilots out there. Can you confirm that?”

“First I’ve heard of it, sir,” Harry replied, “but let me ask around.” Putting his hand over the receiver, the sergeant shouted down the bar: “Hey, any of you guys know anything about a mutiny here on the base today?” A few seconds later, Harry came back on the line: “No, sir. I can’t say that anything like that is happening around here.”

In short order, Michael Metrinko was ordered to Tehran, where he was once again brought before a furious William Sullivan. “He told me that if I ever repeated a story like that again,” Metrinko said, “causing panic and whatnot, he’d have me thrown out of the foreign service. I told him I wasn’t spreading stories, I sent it up through the highest classification code and for his eyes only, but he was still absolutely furious.”

When the Iranian Revolution reached its violent climax four months later, the air force pilots in both Tabriz and Shiraz swiftly switched sides to join with the rebels, while the Tabriz air base commander went on to become the first post-revolution minister of defense. As for how he had, once again, learned of something that eluded his American colleagues, Metrinko was matter-of-fact: “Because I knew Farsi and I made a point of listening to Iranians, and they didn’t. And because the guys in the political section of the embassy who were supposed to keep watch for this kind of stuff were lousy at their jobs. Is that overly harsh? I think it’s deserved.”

Chapter 12

Concerning the shah’s episodes of depression, were they ever so severe as to significantly interfere with his leadership? Did they seem disproportionate to the circumstances?

—questions from CIA psychological profile of the shah, October 10, 1978

Every autumn, senior foreign policy officials of the United States and Great Britain convene for a highly classified two- or three-day conference at which they systematically compare notes on the latest trouble spots around the world. It is a brisk process, for there are a lot of trouble spots to cover in so short a time, and as each new area of concern comes up, the relevant State Department or Foreign Office country analysts are expected to succinctly describe the current situation and prognosis for the near term. In 1978, the British-American Planning Talks were held in Washington, D.C., on October 10 and 11, and it says a great deal about how the two chief Western powers viewed the global state of affairs at the moment that the topic of Iran came up only after such areas of more immediate concern as Namibia, Angola and North Yemen. When at last Iran did come up on the roster and the State Department country director Henry Precht took the floor, those assembled were in for a surprise.

It had been a month since Precht, amid taking his morning shower, had concluded the shah was finished. Perhaps not entirely finished, but on that morning the diplomat had become convinced that there was simply no way the Iranian monarch might recover to rule as he did in the past, that his future had so narrowed as to probably lie somewhere between his assuming a largely ceremonial role and his being thrown out of the country altogether. This assessment was so at odds with administration orthodoxy that the country director chose to bide his time, to share it only when and where it might have some influence.

No sooner had Precht experienced his epiphany, though, than Iran abruptly went quiet again. In the days just after Jaleh Square, a tense calm spread over the country, as if both sides were recoiling at the magnitude of the violence. Soon after had come the Tabas earthquake disaster and a collective mood of national mourning. By the latter part of September, it seemed perhaps Precht’s shower-time revelation was in error after all. At the very least, it appeared there was still plenty of time for the cautious diplomat to choose his openings, to begin imparting his pessimistic views in the most palatable ways possible.

But then the Iranian tide shifted once again. In late September, new masses of protesters marched following reports of Ayatollah Khomeini’s house arrest in Iraq, and even though the restrictions on Khomeini were soon lifted, it was as if the incident reminded the Iranian street of its raison d’être; by the beginning of October, mass demonstrations, some numbering in the tens of thousands, were once again a daily occurrence in Tehran and other Iranian cities. And now loomed a new threat. In September, a wildcat strike by oil workers demanding a pay increase had shut down a swath of oil fields in southern Iran, and by early October similar strikes were afflicting whole sectors of the Iranian economy. Most ominously for the regime, the demands of these striking workers, initially limited to calls for pay increases, began turning to the political, with one labor union after another calling for a lifting of martial law and an end to the dictatorship. Quite suddenly the greatest threat to the state seemed less the tens of thousands of protesters who might take to the streets than the millions of striking workers who could simply shut the country down. It was in this atmosphere that, as the British-American Planning Talks got under way, Henry Precht felt he could no longer stay silent.

As the British notetaker of that session was to record, Precht “opened his remarks by saying that in his view recent events in Iran were the worst foreign policy disaster to hit the West for many years. He said that the current shooting by the military and growing labour difficulties were a foretaste of the chaos to come…. More and more the shah was being opposed by the whole country.” Just in case his listeners missed the point, Precht concluded that “it was difficult to see how the shah could survive.”

Stunned by Precht’s prognosis, both his American colleagues and their British counterparts offered up far more upbeat assessments, but the Iran country director wouldn’t be swayed. To the contrary, as bad as things were now, Precht maintained, they would only get worse, because the West and the shah were now inextricably joined and would lose as one. To this, an incredulous listener asked if Precht meant to suggest that by trying to prop up the regime, the West was harming both itself and the shah. “Mr. Precht said that the answer to both questions was yes, but we had no alternative.” With Great Britain and the United States having jumped aboard the shahanshah bandwagon back in 1953—in fact, having built that bandwagon together—there was no way to jump off now.

Precht’s heretical performance at the Planning Talks might have served as the proverbial canary in the coal mine, a clarion call of alarm to shift Western perceptions on the Iranian crisis. But it did not. To the contrary, in subsequent conversations with their British counterparts, other American officials hastily distanced themselves from Precht’s intemperate remarks, with one going so far as to call them “bullshit.” Perhaps most incredibly, by the following day, Precht himself was backpedaling from his assessment, assuring British diplomats that he had been overly pessimistic. What drove Precht’s abrupt change of heart appeared to be a fear that he had “talked out of school,” always perilous for a diplomat’s career, for as one of the British participants reported to London, Precht now insisted that “the view he gave us on 10 October was a personal one and although shared by some in the State Department, reflected neither an agreed departmental nor inter-agency view.” Further, the British official noted, soundings had been taken of the White House National Security Council, and they “have made it clear that they do not share Precht’s view.”

All nicely settled in Washington and London, perhaps, but in Iran the downward cycle continued. Within days of the conclusion of the British-American Planning Talks, industrial strikes had shuttered much of the kingdom’s economy. Most worrisome for the regime were events in the oil fields, where the ongoing strikes were causing oil production, the main source of government funding, to collapse.

Prime Minister Sharif-Emami’s solution was to throw money at the problem, to not meet just strikers’ demands but even preempt them when possible. Most startling was his granting of a nearly 100 percent pay increase to Iran’s vast pool of civil servants. It didn’t take an economist to grasp that such generosity would only encourage more workers to go out on strike with even greater demands, feeding the hyperinflationary loop that would eventually cause them all to go out on strike again, but as Sharif-Emami might have argued to his detractors, the operative word was “eventually.” He didn’t have the luxury of thinking about eventually; he had only right now.

The policy of economic appeasement was augmented by the political. In the wake of the Jaleh Square tragedy, martial law was effectively neutered, with soldiers ordered to avoid confrontation if at all possible. Simultaneously, Sharif-Emami was meeting with whatever regime opponents would sit down with him, with mainstream politicians and moderate clerics like Ayatollah Shariatmadari, to beg for a little more time and to ask what inducements he might provide to obtain it. Seemingly alone among that small group of actors actually influencing matters, the prime minister held to the belief that a corner was about to be turned, that with their economic demands being met, Iran’s workers might soon be sated, that seeing the cliff the nation was headed over, the moderate opposition might finally seek compromise. By mid-October there was precious little sign of any of this happening, but what else was there to cling to?

Amid this somewhat frenzied atmosphere, Ambassador Sullivan and his senior officers engaged in their own endless circuit of meetings with palace officials and government ministers.

At Niavaran, meanwhile, favor seekers beat a steady path to the door of the dispirited shah. Many of these opportunists wouldn’t have been permitted on palace grounds a year earlier, but now they besieged the king with endless proposals to right the ship of state, most of which involved giving the caller unbridled authority. Others came in with fantastically complicated schemes involving interim councils or select committees impaneled to work up some kind of master blueprint, the implementation of which would be overseen by more councils and more committees. A common subtext to many of these schemes was revenge, whispered propositions that one rival minister or another be offered up to win over the mobs, to convince them that the new anticorruption campaign or the new human rights initiative was truly in earnest. There was a rats-off-a-sinking-ship quality to many of these overtures, a sense that in the final days a supplicant might finally take vengeance on those who had wronged or bested him in the past. Featuring prominently on these hit lists was the former prime minister Amir Abbas Hoveyda.

At first glance, Hoveyda seemed a most unlikely target for retribution. A dapper man known for his walking sticks and the fresh flowers he always wore in his suit lapel, the Persian Sphinx, as he was nicknamed, was an erudite intellectual, a bibliophile who frequently confided to listeners that his greatest ambition upon leaving government service was to open a bookstore in downtown Tehran. He also seemed to be one of the few men around the shah who didn’t lust for riches. Instead, Hoveyda divided his time between a simple apartment in north Tehran and his mother’s small home nearby, while famously driving himself to work in his modest Iranian-built Paykan sedan. But in the zero-sum game of palace politics, the Persian Sphinx had inevitably made a great many enemies during his long tenure, and with a king forever on the lookout for others to blame, those wishing to finally do in Hoveyda were sensing their moment.

But for the few observers who grasped how Iran actually worked, where almost all these schemes floundered, even the honorable ones, was in their failure to account for the kingdom’s core power structure. Put simply, Iran had been ruled by one man for thirty-seven years, and over the course of those years no other Iranian man or woman had been so influential as to make an independent decision of any major significance to the nation. Instead, in keeping with the contradiction inherent to dictatorships everywhere, the higher one rose in the ruling hierarchy, the more limited one’s ability to make any decision at all. If invisible to most outsiders, this phenomenon had reached truly astounding proportions in imperial Iran by 1978.

One who observed this dynamic at close quarters was the American consul in Tabriz, Michael Metrinko. In 1978, the currents of revolt had ebbed and flowed through Tabriz much as they had in every other Iranian city, but one feature that remained constant was the local officials’ utter obeisance to the shah. Metrinko was reminded of this constantly, but never more baldly than on the day he was meeting with the visiting governor-general of a nearby province and thought to ask about the situation in a particular city there. The question elicited a shrug. “I don’t know,” the governor said. “I’ve never been there.” This struck Metrinko as very peculiar, until the official embarrassedly explained that the highway to the city in question passed through another province for a few miles, and for him to set foot out of his home province required the express permission of Niavaran Palace. Since the governor had yet to come up with a compelling reason to visit the city, he told Metrinko, he’d yet to ask permission.

Another incident had involved the same Iranian air force general who would later stay the hand of the mutineers on the Tabriz air base. Over the course of visits to the base, Metrinko had become friends with the general, enough to offer his help upon hearing his son was having difficulties obtaining an American student visa. After filling out the necessary paperwork, Metrinko telephoned the general to say he could pick up the visa at the consulate the next time he was in town. After profusely thanking the consul, the general sheepishly asked, “But would it be possible for you to bring it to the base?”

Similar to the provincial governor, it turned out the general wasn’t allowed to leave the Tabriz airfield without prior authorization. “So here you have a guy who is officer in command of probably the most sensitive air sector of the entire country,” Metrinko explained, “and he’s being treated like a four-year-old. These are people who’ve spent their entire professional lives in mortal fear of getting on the shah’s wrong side. Now you’ve got a national crisis on your hands, you think the shah is going to take a back seat and let them run things, they’re going to start making decisions? No way. These were great people, a lot of them, but their ability to think or act independently had atrophied. The generals? I knew a lot of them, and most of them wouldn’t have been able to maneuver their way through a grocery store checkout line.”

But testament to Iran’s ever-fluctuating dynamics, in the second half of October there appeared some hopeful signs for the regime. Defying all expectations, the forty-day anniversary of Jaleh Square, October 16, came and went with remarkable peacefulness. The following day, Ambassador Sullivan accompanied a visiting congressman to meet the shah and found him “far more robust,” clearly relieved that he’d managed to skirt this latest flash point. At the same time, Sharif-Emami was managing to buy off many of the nation’s striking industrial workers, so that even oil production was beginning to recover. By October 22, it was all enough to cause a cautiously optimistic Sullivan to write Washington of “encouraging signs that the Iranian crisis may have passed a fever point.”

Just two days later came good news of a potentially profound nature. A close aide to Sharif-Emami sought out the American political attaché to report in strict confidence that the government had reached a tentative twelve-point agreement with Ayatollah Shariatmadari and Mehdi Bazargan, the head of an Islamist-oriented opposition party called the Freedom Movement of Iran. Bazargan enjoyed very good relations with Khomeini, the aide explained, and he was now on his way to Paris to meet with the exiled ayatollah and gain his acceptance of the agreement. Once that was achieved, Iran’s national nightmare, one spanning ten months and costing many hundreds of lives, might finally start drawing to a close.

* * *

Shortly after Khomeini’s arrival in France, two officials from the French Foreign Ministry came to talk with him. Sitting in on their meeting was Dr. Ebrahim Yazdi.

The officials made it clear that a requirement of the ayatollah’s continued stay in France was that he assiduously avoid engaging in politics—that is, that he put into abeyance his ongoing campaign to overthrow the shah. Since the French officials didn’t speak Farsi, and Khomeini didn’t speak French, intermediary duties fell to Yazdi. To the officials’ surprise, Khomeini readily agreed to this restriction—at least so Yazdi informed them—and that same afternoon the doctor called a French newspaper to cancel a scheduled interview with the ayatollah.

In hindsight, it seems clear that Khomeini and Yazdi agreed to these terms because they knew that, very soon, they would prove meaningless.

Almost instantly, word of the ayatollah’s presence in France spread through Western Europe’s Iranian diaspora, and soon followers from as far away as Germany and Sweden were descending on Neauphle-le-Château. In an attempt to stem the flow, police erected security barriers on all roads leading into the village and painstakingly checked identity cards, but still the pilgrims came. They were mostly young men of college age, some of the vast number of Iranians who went abroad to study, but increasingly, groups of young Iranian women, their hair tucked beneath headscarves, joined their ranks.

As noted by one of the first foreign journalists on the scene, Jonathan Randal of The Washington Post, Neauphle-le-Château quickly took on the rhythm of choreographed spectacle. Each morning and evening, the ayatollah briefly emerged onto the second-floor balcony of his bungalow; sometimes he acknowledged the adoring crowd below with a short wave, sometimes he merely stared. To the accompaniment of prayerful chants from his followers, Randal noted, once emerged from the house, “the 78-year-old ayatollah walks down the concrete steps and sits cross-legged on a Persian carpet under heavily laden apple trees. He leans against a pillow placed against a stout apple tree. The admirers kneel on blankets and carpets and strain forward to hear the low-pitched voice explain yet another time the reasons for his long struggle.”

Randal was observing this scene just days after the visit by the Foreign Ministry officials, and already Khomeini was flagrantly flouting the conditions of his stay, for the message to his acolytes was nothing if not political: “The Pahlavi dynasty must go. No compromise is possible. The army must rise up and help overthrow the shah.”

By then, Ebrahim Yazdi and the ayatollah’s other lieutenants had let French authorities know that the new residents of Neauphle-le-Château had a little condition of their own: Should the government try to muzzle or force Khomeini from the country, they would publicly denounce France and set much of the Muslim world against it. In light of France’s vast economic and political interests in that world, this threat was bound to give pause.

By mid-October, the pilgrims making for Neauphle-le-Château were being joined by some of Iran’s most prominent conservative clerics. In an ironic twist, a few years earlier the shah had insisted France end its visa requirement for Iranian citizens, and his enemies were now taking advantage of this change to fly to Paris unhindered. This assemblage included Ayatollah Mahmoud Taleghani, Iran’s leading clerical leftist and only recently released from the shah’s prisons. It also included a corpulent little mullah named Sadegh Khalkhali, a Khomeini disciple with an excitable manner and high-pitched giggle soon to gain notoriety as “the hanging judge.” The free passage of these allies meant the ayatollah was no longer reliant on smuggled tape cassettes to get his message to the Iranian people; he could now give instruction in person to his closest disciples who, once returned to Iran, could disseminate it through the clerical network. With such benefits more obvious by the day, the plans to depart France once an amenable Muslim country was found were abandoned. Instead, a second house, one located just across the lane from the first, was rented to accommodate the ever-expanding roster of visiting dignitaries. Testament both to the burgeoning influx of visitors and to the established gender roles of conservative Iranian society, groups of middle-aged and elderly Iranian émigré women, most clad in traditional full-length black chadors, were organized to tend to housekeeping and the regular feeding of the menfolk.

Keeping watch over all this, and fielding the steadily increasing requests from foreign media outlets for interviews or access, were Khomeini’s three self-appointed lieutenants. Along with Ebrahim Yazdi, the troika consisted of two Iranian émigrés to France, Abolhassan Bani-Sadr and Sadegh Ghotbzadeh. Sometimes referred to by the foreign press as “the three viziers,” the men were all in their mid-forties, were Western-educated and had spent most of their adult lives in Western exile as they waged battle against the shah. In this way, the trio served as a kind of bridge—perhaps more accurately, a buffer—between the brusque and uncompromising Khomeini and the outside world.

Beyond their surface similarities, the three viziers were very different. Whereas Yazdi came off as the most sophisticated and erudite of the three, Bani-Sadr had a reputation for being a deep-thinking, if somewhat ponderous, Left Bank intellectual. By contrast, the handsome and charismatic Ghotbzadeh was a consummate charmer, a bon vivant with a fondness for three-piece suits, women and heavy colognes.

One of the first outsiders to gain close access to this exotic community was a journalist with the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, Carole Jerome. Jerome had been covering a different story in Paris when, in late October, she was instructed to make for Neauphle-le-Château and report on the peculiar goings-on there. Her guide was the man who would soon become her lover, Sadegh Ghotbzadeh. “The compound consisted of two unprepossessing white houses that faced each other across the main road at the bottom of the hill,” Jerome wrote of her first visit to the village. “Iranians from all over Europe stood three deep, waiting to see the ayatollah, who daily strolled from one house to the other to conduct prayers under a blue-and-white striped tent in the backyard. My feeling grew that I had stumbled into an unreal world.”

As Jerome watched, Khomeini emerged and began the short walk to the tent. “The crowd broke into cheers of ‘Allah-o-Akbar.’ Some dropped to their knees, others tried to take pictures, while still others either held their children over the cordon toward Khomeini, or they themselves leaned out in a vain attempt to touch his robes.”

Jerome’s own impressions of the ayatollah were less rapturous. “His facial expression betrayed no emotion, and his eyes seemed like black holes. I had a sudden sense of foreboding, a feeling that I was looking into the face of evil.” Jerome tried to shake this thought—after all, millions of Iranians regarded Khomeini as a living saint—but it wouldn’t leave, rooted in his utter opacity, the absence of any apparent emotion even for the adoring crowds surrounding him. As she later wrote, “The horror I felt at that moment remained. My fear never lessened.”

But the more time Jerome spent in Neauphle-le-Château—and the closer she became to Sadegh Ghotbzadeh—the more she perceived another dynamic at work. To a very great extent, what Khomeini did or said passed through the filter of his three viziers. It was they who served as translators during his increasingly frequent interviews with Western journalists, and it was they who penned the proclamations he issued to the foreign media and his followers in Iran. One way to interpret this was that the three lieutenants were attempting to soften Khomeini’s hard edges to make him more palatable to the outside world. Another was that they were gently steering the obdurate old man toward a more temperate and progressive outlook on things. This was certainly the view Sadegh Ghotbzadeh stressed to Jerome, and it served to mollify her concerns over what might occur in a “Khomeini Iran.”

Mehdi Noorbaksh suspects the truth lay somewhere in between these interpretations. “I do think that Yazdi and the others believed they could get Khomeini to moderate,” he said. “But in the meantime, there was nothing to be gained by focusing on differences among the opposition. This was the time to stand together, to be united. Differences could be worked out once success was achieved.”

By late October 1978, it increasingly appeared a version of that success might be imminent as rumors circulated about the potential peace settlement that Prime Minister Sharif-Emami had brokered with Ayatollah Shariatmadari and Mehdi Bazargan. Naturally, all hinged on gaining Khomeini’s acceptance of the deal, and to that end Bazargan embarked on his own pilgrimage to Neauphle-le-Château.

While Shariatmadari’s name had become quite familiar to Western diplomats in Tehran, that of Mehdi Bazargan remained much less so. Yet he was the veritable prototype of the sort of person the West might hope would lead the Iranian opposition to the shah and—should present trends continue—take the reins in his demise. A thoughtful and soft-spoken engineer who had once headed the National Iranian Oil Company, Bazargan was a moderate Islamist who sought the implementation of the 1906 constitution that provided for an Islam-guided parliamentary democracy; he was also amenable to the shah remaining on the throne, but “to reign, not rule.” This platform served as the basis for the Freedom Movement of Iran that Bazargan had co-founded in 1961 and that quickly garnered the support of such mainstream opponents to the Iranian dictatorship as Ebrahim Yazdi. Two years later, Bazargan had rallied to the side of Ayatollah Khomeini in his denunciations of the imperial regime, seeing the cleric’s crusade as a more populist, if rough-edged, version of the FMI’s own charter. For his efforts, Bazargan had been periodically jailed by the shah’s security forces over the years, but he’d never wavered in his calls for an Islam-guided democracy in Iran, nor in his view of Khomeini as this movement’s spiritual guide. On the day that Bazargan was ushered into the ayatollah’s presence in Neauphle-le-Château, it had been fourteen years since the two old allies had seen each other. Also present at that reunion was Bazargan’s longtime supporter Ebrahim Yazdi.

After an extended exchange of pleasantries in one of the bungalow sitting rooms, Bazargan laid out the potential settlement that he and Shariatmadari had forged with the prime minister. The crux of this deal gave the opposition nearly all it had earlier demanded: a restoration of the 1906 constitution and a true parliamentary democracy; a diminution of the shah’s status to an essentially ceremonial role. Due to Khomeini’s growing status as spokesman for the opposition’s disparate elements, Bazargan explained, the pact required at least his tacit approval to move forward.

But the ayatollah’s response could be summed up in a single word: no. No compromise, no concessions, no shah. The only possible settlement now was for the shah to go, to abdicate or be overthrown, and for Iran’s current corrupt governing structure to be dismantled and be replaced by an Islamic republic. It was too late for compromise; what Khomeini demanded now was wholesale revolution. Bazargan insisted that he, too, wanted revolution, but as he later explained to the journalist Oriana Fallaci, “I believed in the step-by-step method, going about it gradually. I was convinced that there was only one way to free ourselves from the Shah, by getting America to abandon him little by little, by acting in such a way that he would gradually get weaker while the people were getting gradually stronger.”

But this argument impressed Khomeini not at all. “Nothing gradual,” he said, “no waiting. We must not lose a day, a minute. The people are calling for an immediate revolution. It’s now or never.”

This was not at all what Mehdi Bazargan had expected, but his surprise only grew when he discovered he had no allies in the room. Even Yazdi, that thoroughly Westernized doctor who had wholeheartedly supported Bazargan and his political platform for nearly two decades, was now in full agreement with Khomeini’s inflexible stand. Taking leave of the ayatollah, Bazargan repaired to his nearby hotel to try to plot a new line of argument to sway the cleric. Over the next several days, he had two more meetings with Khomeini in the Neauphle-le-Château sitting room, but to precisely the same result.

At the same time that Bazargan was meeting with Khomeini, the shah was charting his future with the American and British ambassadors in Tehran. So frequent were these three-way strategy sessions in late October, occurring almost daily and often lasting hours, that it took a while for William Sullivan to realize just how bizarre the situation had become: The King of Kings was now so isolated from his own people and so distrustful of his own palace courtiers that his two closest advisors were emissaries from nations he suspected of trying to destroy him.

Still seeking a way out of the morass, and increasingly coming to feel that Sharif-Emami wouldn’t provide it, on October 24 the shah had outlined to the ambassadors the two options he saw before him. Either he could try to forge a coalition government that would bring in those mainstream opposition leaders who seemed willing to compromise, men like Mehdi Bazargan, or he could sweep all else away and hand things over to the military. That was certainly his generals’ preference, and in recent days they had presented the shah with a top-secret plan titled Operation Kach. Under this plan, the military would temporarily seize power and swiftly round up some four hundred opposition figures. These regime opponents would then be isolated at an army base outside the remote town of Kach—hence the operation’s name—until order could be restored and a more peaceful path forward worked out.

The shah insisted to Sullivan and the British ambassador Anthony Parsons that he much preferred the first option—and this was the emphatic preference of the ambassadors as well—but time was running short, and the generals were growing more anxious. A very great deal rested on what happened in Paris, the monarch explained, on whether Bazargan succeeded in persuading Khomeini to moderate. Should that occur, then Khomeini’s chief clerical rival, the ever-timorous Kazem Shariatmadari, could finally step out of the shadows, which in turn would open the floodgates of support from mainstream clerics and moderate politicians currently waiting things out.

This increasingly looked to be within grasp. On the morning of October 29, Sharif-Emami confided to the two Western ambassadors that two days earlier he had slipped out of Tehran for Qom, where he’d secretly met with Shariatmadari for nearly three hours. While still reluctant to get out ahead of Khomeini in any way, Sharif-Emami said, Shariatmadari was closely monitoring events in Paris and “continues to give quiet support to the government.”

It was a case of exquisitely poor timing, for on that same day of October 29 the headlines of Iran’s newspapers were telling a very different story. It seemed there’d been quite a bit of movement on the political front in recent hours, and none of it to the benefit of the regime.

It had started in France, where Mehdi Bazargan had again met with Khomeini. Time and again, the FMI leader had tried to find a line of argument that might win over the ayatollah, but instead it was Bazargan who had suddenly relented. As he was to later explain to Fallaci, Khomeini “seemed so sure of being right, of winning—his faith was so absolute, so unshakable—that I gave in. And I said, ‘All right, let’s take the plunge. Let’s have the revolution.’ ”

In turn, Bazargan’s about-face was triggering something of a cascade.

* * *

Within the American foreign-policymaking apparatus, the most exclusive “club” is a National Security Council panel, headed by the president’s national security advisor, that includes the secretaries of state and defense, the director of the CIA and the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. It has been known by many different deliberately innocuous names over the years—the 4-A Panel; the 303 Committee; the Operations Advisory Group—and in 1977, President Carter bestowed upon it the blandest name yet: the Special Coordination Committee (SCC). Carter’s national security advisor, Zbigniew Brzezinski, called the committee into emergency session in the White House Situation Room on the early evening of November 2, 1978. For the first time since the beginning of the crisis there, the subject was Iran.

“You can pretty much date serious administration concern over what was happening in Iran to that day,” explained the former NSC officer Gary Sick, who was at the meeting. “It was really the first time the powers that be thought, ‘We’ve got a serious problem on our hands, and we need to figure it out.’ ”

This sudden burst of attention was the result of one of the strangest—and, as it would turn out, most erroneous—alarms raised during the entire course of the Iranian Revolution. Even odder, it stemmed from a moment of apparent panic by that normally most unflappable of men, Ambassador William Sullivan.

The few days prior to the SCC meeting had not been kind to the King of Kings. In Paris, rather than bend Ayatollah Khomeini to the side of moderation, Mehdi Bazargan had thrown in his lot with the militant cleric—and once Bazargan caved, Ayatollah Shariatmadari had scurried to follow suit. On October 29, at the same time that the prime minister was assuring Western ambassadors of Shariatmadari’s “quiet support” of his government, Iranian newspapers were carrying excerpts from an interview the cleric had given to Agence France-Presse expressing “total solidarity” with Khomeini. “We the religious hierarchy and the people have no hopes for the present government anymore,” Shariatmadari insisted. As if to underscore the point, the street protests against the regime that day were some of the largest the nation had ever seen.

While the shah clung to the increasingly slender hope that enough moderate opposition figures might be persuaded to join a coalition government, more bad news had come in while he was meeting with the American and British ambassadors on November 1: a new demand from the mainstream National Front opposition party for a national referendum to decide whether the monarchy should remain in any form. This demand tore at the very fabric of Iran’s governing system—even the 1906 constitution that the opposition wished to restore recognized a monarchical role—and the shah angrily rejected it. “I’d rather leave the country than submit to that,” he told the envoys. Back at their embassies, Sullivan and Parsons dutifully relayed news of this latest complication to their respective capitals that same night.

But then something bizarre happened. A few hours after sending his matter-of-fact account of the meeting, Sullivan sent a secret addendum that stated, “During our audience with shah evening November 1, British ambassador and I detected first signs that he might be thinking of abdication.” As evidence, Sullivan referenced the shah’s offhand remark that he would rather leave the country than submit to a referendum. From that narrow basis, the ambassador posited, “I feel we need to anticipate a meeting in the near future in which the shah reports that none of his efforts at a political solution will work and that he needs to decide whether to abdicate and turn the country over to the military, or to impose military government under his continuing rule. He would doubtless say that he would stay as the ruler only if the U.S. and U.K. say they will continue to support him. This is a decision which probably has to be made for the United States by the president…therefore, I shall need contingency guidance soonest.” Sullivan then added, “I have not—repeat not—discussed this with British ambassador.”

Along with being something of a non sequitur, this last sentence appeared to directly contradict Sullivan’s earlier statement that both he and Parsons had picked up on the shah’s thoughts of abdication; how would Sullivan know this unless they had talked? And in fact, Parsons had gleaned nothing of the sort—at least he made no mention of it in his own dispatch to London—and it begged the question of just why the American envoy was seeking to include and exclude his British counterpart simultaneously. But this was a question there simply wasn’t time to ponder, for, as Sullivan wrote in closing out his cable, “at the rate things are moving here, I believe the decision point may be reached within the next forty-eight hours. I would therefore appreciate guidance within that time-frame.”

This was a stunning turn. From the onset of Iran’s unrest and continuing through that October, Sullivan had expressed complete confidence in the shah’s ability to survive. Just six days earlier, in fact, he’d flatly stated in a cable to Washington, “Our destiny is to work with [the] shah.” He had also made clear to one and all that he wouldn’t suffer the advice, let alone the interference, of the hall wanderers back in Washington, nor of the Chicken Littles on his own staff; at least twice by then he had upbraided Michael Metrinko for bringing him bad news. This was certainly the impression Gary Sick had taken away from his meeting with Sullivan.

“He was one of the State Department stars,” Sick explained. “He had essentially run U.S. policy in Southeast Asia out of Laos, and then been in the Philippines during a very difficult time. He was in the big leagues and so was Iran, and he wasn’t about to let people in Washington tell him what to do. His message out of Tehran had been very consistent: ‘Everything’s fine, stay out of my lane.’ But now, all of a sudden, things are looking bad. He doesn’t want to get blamed for it, so now it’s, ‘Hey, we’ve got a problem, what are you guys going to do about it?’ ”

But the more he thought about the contents of Sullivan’s top-secret addendum, the more troubled Sick became. “He writes that the shah is considering abdicating, but goes out of his way to say he didn’t discuss this with the other person in the room, [the British ambassador] Parsons. Why? Why wouldn’t you discuss this shocking development with the only other person who was there? The only answer I can come up with is that Sullivan knew Parsons wouldn’t back him up. And he didn’t. Parsons was a very close observer of the shah, very thorough, but nowhere in his dispatches during that time did he ever suggest the shah was thinking of stepping down. So, you have to wonder, what was Sullivan’s game?”

Sick has a theory. “Well, if you’re Sullivan, how do you make a 180-degree turn without anyone noticing?” he asked. “By putting it on the shah. So now, all of a sudden, it’s the shah who’s changed his mind about everything, not Sullivan. Pretty clever.”

There wasn’t time to parse any of this out on November 2, however. No sooner had Sullivan’s memorandum with its forty-eight-hour ticking clock circulated through the upper echelons of the administration than the Special Coordination Committee was called into emergency session.

That meeting was to prove significant for another reason as well: It was then that the first glimmers of a schism in American policy toward Iran began to show.

In trying to advise the shah on what course he should pursue, the more dovish State Department felt it was vital that his program of political reforms continue while he sought to restore order; the more hawkish Brzezinski felt that order should be reestablished first. Although elements of this difference in viewpoints had existed for some time, few in the administration had seen a pressing need to resolve it. That changed with Sullivan’s cable of November 2, and its alarmist tone provided Brzezinski with the stronger hand at the SCC conference.

The result was a nuanced and carefully worded top-secret cable to Sullivan, authored by Brzezinski but with State Department concurrence. First, Sullivan was to tell the shah that “the United States supports him without reservation in the current crisis.” Neatly sidestepping the question of whether he should appoint a coalition or military government—“we have confidence in the shah’s judgement”—Brzezinski wrote that “we also recognize the need for decisive action and leadership to restore order.” Finessing his law-and-order-first position, the national security advisor closed by writing, “Once order and authority have been restored, we hope he will resume prudent efforts to promote liberalization.”

Sullivan was instructed to personally convey this message to the shah as soon as possible—he did so within hours of its receipt—while Brzezinski followed up with a telephone call to the shah the next morning. Just hours later, however, there occurred a bit of a messaging glitch when Secretary of State Vance, asked during a press conference to confirm the administration’s evolving position on Iran, remarked, “We will support any Iranian government restoring order while the reform process continues.” However inadvertent, by suggesting reforms should continue while order was restored rather than resumed afterward, Vance had just handed Exhibit A to those looking to find inconsistency in the administration’s message.

Among those searching for such inconsistency was the King of Kings himself. In his memoir Answer to History, the shah was to repeatedly claim that the Carter administration’s mixed messaging to him, beginning with those crossed statements at the beginning of November, effectively paralyzed his efforts to devise a strategy toward ending the crisis. In subsequent years, many writers and historians have echoed that charge, reinforcing the Carter administration’s enduring reputation for vacillation and inconstancy.

Rather less attention, however, has been given to the question of why a head of state would seek instructions from a foreign power on what he or she should do in the face of a domestic crisis. As at so many other crucial junctures in his life, the shah was looking for others to act, others to lead and, perhaps most crucially of all, others to blame should things not work out. This had been a lifelong pattern with the King of Kings, so why not at the moment of greatest test?

And in fulfillment of that pattern, matters would once again be decided for him—not by the Americans, it turned out, but by a combination of the Iranian military and the Iranian “street.” On November 4, just one day after Brzezinski’s bolstering telephone call, massive protests effectively shut down the kingdom. That afternoon, the shah again summoned the American and British ambassadors to Niavaran for another “prayer meeting,” as Sullivan called it.

Even at this eleventh hour, the king hoped there might yet be members of the opposition willing to compromise, but for that to happen, Sullivan noted in his subsequent report to Washington, “the National Front and Shariatmadari would have to have the courage to make an open break with Khomeini.” There were absolutely no signs of this happening. To the contrary, when Sullivan was composing his report to Washington, it was early morning in Tehran, and out the embassy windows he saw thousands of young men, regime opponents presumably, already on the move. “I assume more clashes will ensue today,” he wrote in closing.

That comment proved more than prescient. November 5, 1978, would go down as the most lawless and chaotic day of the revolution thus far. By midmorning, enormous crowds of mostly young men were raging through the streets of downtown Tehran. There they set fire to banks, movie theaters and hotels, overturned and burned buses and private cars. For several hours, a huge swath of the capital was given over to mob rule as police and soldiers passively stood by or, in a number of cases, hastily retreated. In early afternoon, this scenario led to the ravaging of much of the British embassy compound, with the company of soldiers deployed to guard it scrambling aboard their transport trucks and racing away as rioters closed in. In quick order, the chancery was set aflame, and then it was the city’s uniformed firefighters who stood by and did nothing. When Ambassador Parsons patched a call through to the army chief of staff, General Gholam Reza Azhari, to ask why the consulate’s security detail had withdrawn, he got an angry reply. “It is all your fault,” the general spat. “You have been persuading His Majesty for too long to stop us from intervening and restoring the situation.”

In late afternoon, Ambassador Sullivan was again summoned to Niavaran. To get there, he traversed a city transformed into a battlefield. Everywhere crowds were burning government buildings, overturning cars, destroying whatever lay in their path that bore even a tangential link to the regime. Nowhere did either police or soldiers appear to be confronting the mobs.

Once inside the Niavaran compound, the normally fragrant air of its gardens redolent with the smell of the fires burning in the city below, Sullivan had the eerie thought that perhaps the main palace was abandoned, for not even a soldier or ceremonial footguard stood at its entrance. Pulling open the massive front door, he stepped inside and tentatively wandered down the cavernous main hallway, also deserted, until a startled Queen Farah suddenly emerged from a side room. “She was obviously surprised to see me, and I had clearly not expected that she would be the first person I would encounter there.” When Sullivan explained that he’d been summoned by her husband, the shahbanou found a functionary to lead him to the shah’s study.

He found the king grim-faced but uncharacteristically resolute. With the moderate opposition rejecting his latest proposals, the shah explained, he now had no choice but to hand matters over to the generals. Later that night, soldiers would flood the streets of the capital, so that Tehranis would wake up in the morning to full army control. The shah would then address the nation and announce he was installing a military government, which would officially take over that afternoon. At the same time, all newspapers were to be closed down, while the army seized the national radio and television broadcasting center and set out to arrest some of the more notoriously corrupt figures of past administrations. With his usual pessimism, the shah wasn’t convinced any of this would work but felt he had no choice. Nor did he expect things to go smoothly. As Sullivan was to report to Washington, “He expects Khomeini to call for a jihad and assumes there will be more bloodshed.”

After the better part of an hour, the two men were joined by Anthony Parsons, who had been delayed by the attack on his embassy and the general chaos in the streets. Irate at the destruction of his chancery as security forces withdrew, Parsons perhaps hoped to get a rise out of the shah by repeating rumors he’d heard that much of the day’s devastation was actually the handiwork of the SAVAK secret police. Rather than be offended, the shah merely shrugged: “Who knows? These days I am prepared to believe anything.”

As they waited for the newly designated military prime minister to reach Niavaran, the three men pondered what might happen in the days just ahead. Now that he’d at last made a decision, the shah seemed less fretful, but still looked to the near future with foreboding. In addition to whatever Khomeini’s reaction to the new government might be, there was the question of just how radically the generals would press their anticorruption drive, how many of the old regime might be arrested. As was now common, the shah discussed these matters in a passive tone, as if he were a mere observer to events rather than their orchestrator.

By ten o’clock, and with still no sign of the prime minister designate, the two ambassadors finally left the palace to return to their respective embassy compounds, this time to be transported in a heavily armed convoy. On their way down the palace front steps, they met the arriving army chief of staff, Gholam Reza Azhari. This was the same general who had given Ambassador Parsons the tongue-lashing by phone earlier in the day, but he now appeared disconsolate, a broken man. “I am ruined,” Azhari told the envoys. “His Majesty has appointed me prime minister.”

* * *

On the early afternoon of November 6, a gaunt King of Kings appeared before television cameras in a business suit to read a six-minute speech announcing the formation of the military government. While most Iranians’ initial reaction was shock at the shah’s physical deterioration, equally astounding were the words he issued in his soft, mellifluous voice. Directly addressing those who had taken to the nation’s streets, he noted that “you have risen against tyranny and corruption” and that “I cannot but approve of your revolution as the king and as a citizen of Iran.” Going on to promise that the mistakes of the past would not be repeated, he closed with the extraordinary declaration “In these moments of rising against foreign domination, tyranny and corruption, I stand by your side.”

By all accounts, the shah was initially quite pleased with the speech—after all, he had edited and approved it—but in the view of almost all others, friend and foe alike, it was an astounding blunder. Quite aside from his halting delivery and tentative manner, the shah had all but embraced those seeking to overthrow him, as if the kingdom’s “tyranny and corruption” were somehow someone else’s doing. What’s more, he himself had employed the word so taboo in state circles as to be essentially banned, acknowledging that those taking to the streets were engaged not in hooliganism or criminality—the regime’s heretofore preferred descriptors—but in “revolution.” For a people keenly attuned to the optics of the shahanshah’s appearances, also noteworthy was that he delivered this speech sitting down when normally he stood.

But of course, nothing was ever the shahanshah’s fault, blame always rested with others, and so pathological had this need become that even a poor choice of words tripping from his own lips had to be the mistake or misdeed of someone else. With time, the shah would come to appreciate the disastrous nature of his November 6 performance, but as he would write in his last memoir, Answer to History, “I was certainly betrayed, because I was obliged in some way to relinquish the ability to think and persuaded to say that which I did not wish to say.”

This same spirit of blamelessness was evident in a meeting the king convened in the Niavaran library on November 8, two days after his national address. As was increasingly the case, Queen Farah attended this meeting, but under the circumstances the main item on the agenda seemed a rather esoteric concern: a proposal to restructure the shah’s private investment organization, the Pahlavi Foundation.

According to one of those present, the shah seemed particularly distracted that day, ill at ease, but the first hint of what was coming occurred when, after a few minutes’ desultory talk of the Pahlavi Foundation, he abruptly announced there was something else he wished to discuss. At this, his chief of staff, a man named Nosratollah Moinian, asked permission to leave.

“Why don’t you stay?” the shah said. “Your advice will be useful.”

In an act that would have been utterly inconceivable mere weeks earlier, Moinian spurned the shah’s request; insisting he had urgent business to attend to, he gathered up his papers and left.

In the two days since the military government had taken over, a brittle calm had settled over Iran. General Azhari had deployed thousands of soldiers to the nation’s streets and already arrested some of the more notorious figures of the ancien régime. These included General Nematollah Nassiri, the fearsome former head of SAVAK, as well as several former government ministers and palace hangers-on on corruption charges. As the shah told those gathered in the library, one frequently mentioned target of recent months had not been included in the dragnet, and the generals weren’t at all happy about it. “I am being pressed to authorize the arrest of Hoveyda,” he said, “because they say this would pacify public opinion. Let me ask you to give your advice on the matter.”

The shah methodically went around the room eliciting opinions on the arrest of his prime minister of twelve and a half years. While several were hesitant, others strongly endorsed the idea; no one defended Hoveyda. Amid these deliberations, a call came in from the recently appointed chief of SAVAK, General Nasser Moghadam. It seemed remarkably convenient timing, especially when, in response to an apparent question from Moghadam, the shah replied, “Yes, we are discussing the matter right now.”

After a few moments of somberly listening to the SAVAK chief, the king hung up and announced they needed to make a decision about Hoveyda right then. Again, he went around the table. Again, no one spoke up for Hoveyda. “Very well,” he concluded. “Unfortunately, we’ll have to do it.”

One of those in attendance suggested that perhaps Hoveyda could be alerted so that at least his arrest might be carried out with a semblance of dignity. The shah thought this an excellent idea and turned to his wife. “You could do it perhaps.”

But the empress wasn’t having it. After nearly twenty years of marriage, she was keenly aware of her husband’s limitless need to shirk responsibility and had undoubtedly seen where this conversation was headed far earlier than the others. “He was your prime minister,” she angrily shot back, “not mine!”

Shortly after, the shah called Hoveyda at his Tehran apartment to give him the news. Even at this late hour, he couldn’t play it straight with his most loyal of former subordinates and concocted a convoluted story that had Hoveyda being taken to a SAVAK safe house for his own protection. The Persian Sphinx saw through the charade immediately but, ever the decorous statesman, declined to call the shah out. Instead, as one Francophile to another, he signed off with “Je suis le soldat de votre majesté” (I am Your Majesty’s soldier).

When the arresting officers showed up at his apartment, Hoveyda had one last request: He wished to drive himself to the safe house. After this request was passed up through the chain of command—it surely went up to the shah himself—permission was granted, and shortly after Hoveyda steered his sedan in the direction of his prison flanked by two undercover SAVAK cars.

In her more than four decades of living in exile, Farah Pahlavi has frequently spoken of her relationship with Amir Abbas Hoveyda, of how she appreciated the Renaissance man amid all the ambitious schemers at the court, of how much she came to value his friendship and advice, especially in those traumatic last months of the revolution. She has also admitted that at that meeting where Hoveyda’s fate was decided, she failed to come to his defense. In her memoir, she described her silence as a desperate attempt to “protect the country in this hurricane…a purely political move made in a climate of great confusion.”

In person, she was even more candid. When pressed on what happened at that meeting, the eighty-six-year-old woman came as close to tears as at any point during a very long interview. “We did it to save ourselves,” she finally muttered.

Part Three

He doesn’t know what to do next, and neither do we.

—anonymous State Department official on the shah, November 7, 1978

Chapter 13

Like economics, revolution is often a matter of faith, a test of the human capacity to believe. Convince enough people that an American dollar or Indian rupee has value, and it does. Convince enough people that a seemingly omnipotent dictator can fall, and he just might. While this peril lurks for almost any autocrat anywhere, it might have been especially pronounced for the King of Kings, presiding as he did over a land steeped not only in faith but in faith’s many ancillary properties: superstition and myth, revelation and fantasy. And even though he had long prospered from its manufacture, in the end Mohammad Reza Pahlavi had the misfortune of ruling over a place where faith regularly trumped fact, where delusion and reality fused.

In late November 1978, a kind of mass mania swept Iran amid reports that Ayatollah Khomeini’s face was visible on the surface of the moon. Multitudes of Iranians took to rooftops or the darkened outskirts of villages to observe this supernatural phenomenon for themselves, and many concluded it was absolutely true. On a gloomier note, at about the same time came rumors that in his French bungalow Khomeini had received a prophecy that he would soon die, with December 9 frequently cited as the outer limit of his expiration date. If the messaging of the man-in-the-moon spectacle remained open to debate, the dead-in-December one seemed quite straightforward: For Khomeini to die fulfilled, his followers needed to hurry up and overthrow the apostate shah before the ayatollah’s fast-approaching demise.

But this revelation soon found competition from a different source. From Mashhad came reports that Ayatollah Hossein Ghomi, an elderly and highly esteemed cleric, had received his own divine visitation. This one was from Imam Reza, the eighth imam of Shia Islam who was martyred in the ninth century and whose tomb in Mashhad is the most sacred site in all of Iran. In a rather surprising twist, Imam Reza was said to have told Ghomi he wasn’t at all happy with how the Iranian people were treating their shah and was particularly perturbed by a mob’s recent attack on Mashhad’s Hyatt hotel. Ghomi eventually denied the entire account, but not before it had inspired pro-shah demonstrators in Mashhad and a number of other Iranian cities.

In any event, the Mashhad story was a distinct outlier; in the autumn of 1978, the overwhelming majority trended strongly against the shah and often focused on his physical well-being. One of the more colorful held that during the royal family’s summer vacation, the shah had been shot in the leg by one of his nephews in an assassination attempt. Accounts differed as to whether the disgruntled relative was the son of his sister Ashraf or his deceased brother, Ali Reza, but the purported wound wasn’t so grievous as to prevent the king from being seen participating in a pickup game of volleyball shortly after. Perennial favorites were those tales that had the monarch slowly dying: of cancer, of leukemia, of syphilis, of a highly mysterious but invariably fatal disease.

As in the case of the dead-by-December-9 prophecy, many of these stories were put to the service of the revolution and gained credence by their specificity. In mid-November, seemingly credible reports swirled through Tehran telling of four West German businessmen waylaid and murdered by antigovernment guerrillas near the Caspian Sea. In fact, no Germans were murdered, but the story had the effect of sufficiently terrifying Iran’s massive expatriate population that many began making plans to leave. Soon after, a group claiming to be striking workers at the government’s central bank published a list of 102 businessmen and palace cronies who’d sent tens of millions of their ill-gotten dollars out of the country, with the precise amounts withdrawn noted beside each miscreant’s name. The list was a hoax, but it cleverly served two purposes, reminding ordinary Iranians of the corruption lying at the heart of their society and suggesting that even the most privileged were now abandoning the shah. After a particularly fraught night in which gunfire had rent the air for hours, American embassy officials were told the bodies of thirty protesters killed by the shah’s soldiers lay on the steps of the same central bank building. Far from finding bodies, an embassy investigative team detected no sign that a violent confrontation had occurred there at all. No matter; with a journalist strike having shut down almost every quasi-reliable newspaper and media outlet in the capital, Tehranis now got their news by word of mouth, so all these stories quickly took on the sheen of truth.

Especially injurious to the imperial regime in late 1978 was that, like conspiracy theories everywhere, these accounts traveled on a current of circular logic impervious to refutation, a world in which the absence of proof constituted proof itself and where skeptics and deniers were merely fulfilling their assigned role in the conspiracy. In this vein, the explanation for a news clip showing a robust shah rather than a physically diminished one was that the video had been taped months earlier and made to look current through electronic sleight of hand; indeed, that the regime would resort to such complex and high-tech trickery was further “proof” that the shah was falling apart. For that matter, of course American officials would deny finding bodies on the central bank steps, because they needed to defend their murderous dictator protégé at all costs.

But however much this cynicism might have stemmed from a proclivity within Iranian society, it was also one long nurtured by the King of Kings himself.

Over the course of his reign, the shah had fed his subjects a complicated—in fact, nonsensical—narrative that held him out as their guardian against an international cabal of imperialists seeking their subjugation, a coven of schemers that, when convenient, even extended to his American benefactors. Simultaneously, his state-controlled media had routinely lied to the people about all manner of things great and small, so much so that perhaps even he could no longer distinguish the truth. How else to explain his surreal speech of November 6 in which he intimated he was the embodiment of the revolution? After decades of falsehoods so naked as to insult common sense, what possible reason was there to believe anything the state said now?

And then there was the ultimate trump card: SAVAK. Having created a security force touted as all-powerful and all-seeing, the shahanshah was now reaping what he had sown. Since Ayatollah Khomeini didn’t, in fact, die on December 9 as prophesied, the failed prophecy was clearly a SAVAK disinformation plot designed to embarrass the cleric. Similarly, if Ayatollah Ghomi hadn’t disclaimed his let’s-all-be-nice-to-the-shah revelation—and he’d been suspiciously slow in doing so—then it would only have meant he was on SAVAK’s payroll. Best of all from the standpoint of the opposition, the secret police agency’s brutal reputation could now be employed to mask a multitude of sins. In mid-December, after bands of religious extremists terrorized a Bahai community in Shiraz province, looting and burning dozens of Bahai homes, local mullahs insisted the attacks were carried out by SAVAK agents provocateurs. The woman beaten for walking down the street unveiled or the shopkeeper firebombed for staying open during a strike call? SAVAK. Even a lynch mob murdering an innocent man on the belief he was SAVAK; obviously, either the killers had been fed the false information by SAVAK, or the mob itself was SAVAK, intent on silencing a patriot about to expose them. This notion of the shah’s secret police as omnipotent and everywhere wasn’t limited to the uneducated or overly credulous. By some accounts, when many of the leftist intellectuals who cast their lot in with Khomeini finally got around to reading some of his more incendiary tracts—his venomous denunciations of Judaism, his treatise that only governments “appointed by God” were legitimate—they concluded that no sane person could possibly espouse such things, that clearly they were SAVAK forgeries.

But these delusions were hardly exclusive to Iranians. The CIA, for example, had long feared a highly sophisticated communist network operating in Iran, a worry fueled by the paucity of leftist revolutionaries that SAVAK’s counterintelligence branch was able to capture. Scarcely considered was the alternative—and far more accurate—explanation that there simply weren’t that many communist insurrectionists out there to find. Similarly, in the early days of the revolution, before Khomeini emerged as its spiritual leader, both CIA and State Department analysts discounted the danger to the regime by noting that the protests occurring around the country were leaderless and disorganized, while failing to grasp that this meant popular anger was so deep and widespread that the protests required neither leaders nor organization. And then there was the greatest loop of circular reasoning of all, the one that drove American policy toward Iran from beginning to end. This was the belief, never held up to serious examination, that as the possessor of one of the most powerful armies on earth, the shah could easily crush his opponents if his situation ever became dire enough to require it. Ergo, since he didn’t unleash that army, it meant his situation wasn’t dire.

When it came to the kind of magical thinking that truly counted, that sustained the deluded on their long journey, the Iranians found kindred spirits in their American friends.

* * *

On the evening of November 18, the American ambassador William Sullivan was driven up to the Niavaran palace complex for another audience with the shah. As with so many of his other recent journeys there, he was joined by his British counterpart, Anthony Parsons.

The shah appeared tired and somewhat tense to Sullivan; he complained that he had been on the phone all day giving instructions to the military, and “it was hard on his nerves, his stomach was in knots.” Seeing as this meeting had been requested by the ambassadors—usually it was the reverse—the king grimly joked that he hoped his visitors weren’t planning to place a new set of problems before him. They were not. Instead, Sullivan and Parsons had come to hear the shah’s evaluation of the new military government, now twelve days old, and to gently prod him toward more decisive action.

By almost any measure, the administration of General Gholam Azhari was faring better than any of the men in Niavaran might have dared hope. The mass demonstrations and violence that had rocked Tehran and other Iranian cities at the beginning of the month and led to the military takeover had given way to a kind of brooding calm, one now approaching the two-week mark. With the security forces explicitly ordered to avoid lethal force at all costs, the number of Iranian protesters reported killed in clashes during that time had fallen to an estimated forty—still a lamentable number, but about one-tenth the number killed on the nation’s infamous highways during the same span. While the overall economy was a shambles and a number of industrial sectors remained shuttered, a nationwide general strike called by Ayatollah Khomeini on November 12 was a resounding failure. Further, an oil workers’ strike that had paralyzed the kingdom’s most vital industry had been effectively broken after the state arrested some two hundred union leaders and gave workers an ultimatum to immediately return to their jobs or be fired. By the time of the shah’s meeting with the ambassadors, oil production had dramatically spiked and in just three more days would approach its “peacetime” average of six million barrels per day.

There were also positive developments on the political front. Earlier on that same day of November 18, General Azhari had reshuffled his cabinet to bring in more civilian professionals; with that body now consisting of eighteen civilians and just six military men, it hardly constituted a military government at all. Joined to this were signs of a new moderation in the mainstream political opposition. American embassy officials had quietly taken a sounding of some of its leaders and noted how their earlier insistence on the shah’s abdication was softening, with some even talking of fashioning a compromise that would leave him on the throne with a degree of authority. The king was even catching a break from a Western press that he often accused of grossly exaggerating his problems; from The New York Times, an article titled “Iran Quieter as Shah Shows Some Muscle” was about to run on the front page of the world news section. No one was yet saying the regime was out of danger—there were still enormous challenges ahead—but on November 18 it did appear a kind of respite was taking hold, an opening in which bold action might carry the day. This was the subtext of the ambassadors’ trek up the hill to Niavaran.

But thoughts of bold action were not where the shah wished to take their conversation that evening. Instead, he was still brooding over a spate of recent “strange events” for which he sought both explanation and reassurance from his American guest.

A few days earlier, he told his visitors, he’d taken a telephone call purportedly from Senator Ted Kennedy. The shah had expected a message of encouragement from the Democratic leader, but instead “Kennedy” had repeatedly urged him to abdicate before abruptly hanging up. The king was also stung by press reports that President Carter’s closest advisor, Hamilton Jordan, was discussing contingency plans in case he was deposed. And then there was the accusation directed squarely at William Sullivan himself. The shah had heard that in a meeting with members of the American business community in Tehran the ambassador had said that the only chance for peace in Iran was for the shah to leave. Had Sullivan really said this?

But the ambassador had played this game with the King of Kings many times before—so many, in fact, that he and his aides had taken to forecasting future rounds of accusations and preemptively gathering evidence to refute them. After pointing out that the Kennedy telephone call was obviously a hoax, Sullivan handed the shah a printout of Hamilton Jordan’s actual comments to show that the version he’d heard was taken out of context. As for his own purported comments to the American business community, the ambassador had said nothing of the sort but, long attuned to the palace dynamic of hangers-on currying favor by fueling the shah’s insecurities, had taken the precaution of tape-recording his remarks. When he offered to have a copy of the recording brought up to the palace, the shah sheepishly declined. “After a little more therapy,” Sullivan acerbically wrote in his report of their meeting, “we settled into a more rational discussion of the events of the day.”

A more rational discussion, perhaps, but one conspicuously devoid of anything suggesting urgency. Through the halls of Niavaran in the middle of November there continued to gambol a variegated stream of sycophants and favor seekers, each with their own idea of how the shah might right the ship of state. Amid the opportunists were some figures of genuine probity, but they appeared to share the shah’s indolent approach to problem-solving, a refusal to recognize they were now living under a ticking clock. To the ambassadors, the shah explained he’d recently spoken with a charismatic former prime minister named Ali Amini—and never mind that he’d sacked Amini back in the 1960s for being too charismatic—and warmed to his proposal of forming a consultative council that might serve as a go-between in bringing various opposition elements to the palace. As Sullivan drily noted of the plan, “This council would attempt to develop the dialogue which would eventually produce the ‘national govt’ to supervise general elections.” With all this talk of consultative councils and supervisory committees, it was as if the shah and his advisors hoped to best the opposition by simply boring them to death.

At the same time, the monarch complained, he was being bombarded with messages from his American friends to be more assertive. From these same sources, he was hearing insinuations that he had gone soft and lacked “guts.” As he instructed Ambassador Sullivan that evening, “You should tell these people that I have guts, but I also have a heart and a brain. And I do not intend to murder the youth of my nation in order to rule it.”

But if in mid-November 1978 the shah still clung to the hope of outside rescue—and deep down, he most certainly did—what he most sought at that juncture was a road map of the way forward, a clear set of instructions from his foreign allies on how to proceed. But this was not happening either. To the contrary, as the Iranian crisis deepened, so the message from Washington was becoming increasingly muddled and contradictory. Much of the blame for this could be set squarely at the feet of one of the shah’s guests that evening: Ambassador William Sullivan.

Through most of 1978, Sullivan had been dismissive of any real threat to the shah’s throne, before performing an abrupt about-face with his November 2 report suggesting the monarch might abdicate. Understandably, that cable had caused a stir in Washington, spurring the Special Coordination Committee emergency meeting that same day, but another secret memorandum of Sullivan’s a week later had greatly added to the alarm. It was titled “Thinking the Unthinkable.”

In it, Sullivan opined that while the senior ranks of the Iranian military remained fiercely loyal to the shah, he had already lost so much support among its junior officers and rank and file that it might soon be too late for him to recover. In that event, the ambassador theorized, the lower military ranks might be induced to forge an alliance with the more moderate religious opposition and institute a kind of progressive Islamic republic. With such an alliance holding the levers of governance, Ayatollah Khomeini could then return to Iran to assume a “Gandhi-like role” as the spiritual leader of the new regime, but shorn of any direct political power. In this way, Sullivan conjectured, a shah-less Iran might not be such a bad thing for the United States after all: The enormous economic and military ties between the two nations ensured that cooperation would continue, and the religious tilt of such a regime would have the salutary effect of keeping the ever-grasping Soviets at bay. The ambassador wasn’t necessarily advocating this scenario, he explained, but simply throwing it out as a mental exercise for Washington to start thinking of possible alternatives should the shah’s prospects continue to decline.

To the NSC’s Gary Sick, though, Sullivan’s startling missive, coming so close on the heels of his shah-might-abdicate report, seemed a particularly brazen attempt at deflection. “It felt like he was trying to put his marker down, that if things got worse, he had created this paper trail that would allow him to say, ‘I told you so.’ This was just so diametrically opposite of the things he’d been saying for months it was stunning.” Indeed, it had been less than two weeks since Sullivan had argued that Khomeini, the man he was now assigning a “Gandhi-like role,” should be not only ignored but “firmly quarantined.”

To senior foreign policy makers already spread thin by two massive and extraordinarily complex global initiatives—the ongoing Arab-Israeli peace talks and the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty (SALT) II negotiations with the Soviet Union—the news that they also had a serious problem on their hands in Iran came as an unwelcome shock. Sullivan’s “Unthinkable” memo also sent Jimmy Carter into something of a fury. “People have this image of Carter as this laid-back, easygoing good ole boy,” Sick said. “Not true. He had a temper, and when he gave over to it, you knew right away.”

Shortly after reading Sullivan’s missive, Carter sat down at his Oval Office desk to pen a frosty note to his three closest foreign policy advisors—Secretary of State Cyrus Vance, National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski and the CIA director, Stansfield Turner—demanding they do a much better job of coordinating information out of Iran and keeping him apprised.

It would be hard to conjure three men more different in both temperament and outlook than the recipients of that note. Courtly and soft-spoken, Secretary of State Vance was committed to restoring the United States’ international standing from the tarnishings of Cold War excess—the Vietnam War, its long embrace of brutal anticommunist dictatorships across the Third World—and regarded Carter’s human rights policy as a crucial stepping-stone to achieve that. By contrast, the brusque and often abrasive Brzezinski, a refugee from Soviet-controlled Poland, tended to view almost every international development through the prism of East-West confrontation, the zero-sum Cold War equation that held that any loss by the United States translated into a gain for the Soviet Union, and vice versa. As for Stansfield Turner, a former naval admiral, while politically falling somewhere between the other two, in 1978 he was overseeing an agency fairly shattered by post-Watergate revelations of its past misdeeds—including its involvement in the 1953 coup in Iran—and sharply reined in by a reformist Congress. Despite these profound differences, this leadership troika had worked remarkably well with one another through the various foreign policy challenges of the first two years of Carter’s presidency. That was all about to change with Iran, and a prime catalyst was the president’s handwritten note of November 11.

To Carter’s demand that his closest advisors and their agencies work in closer cooperation, the precise opposite was now to occur; that’s because, with the faint whiff of failure already beginning to settle over policy in Iran, a bureaucratic blame game had been triggered. Eager to escape the president’s wrath and to avoid being scapegoated by history for “losing Iran,” each relevant branch of government would now pursue its own agenda and erect new firewalls to withhold information from one another. Scornful of Ambassador Sullivan’s suddenly defeatist attitude, Brzezinski embarked on a series of his own initiatives to get a “true picture” of events in Iran without informing the State Department. Stung by the NSC’s criticism, State began marking much of the daily flood of cable traffic flowing out of the Tehran embassy as “for internal distribution only” so that neither the National Security Council nor the Central Intelligence Agency had access. For his part, Stansfield Turner, convinced that Brzezinski was setting the CIA up to take the fall should the shah be overthrown, barred his officers from independently sharing Iranian intelligence with either the NSC or State, decreeing that any such dissemination would come only from him.

Perhaps inevitably given this dynamic, the views and actions of the two agencies most directly involved in setting Iran policy, State and the NSC, swiftly began to deviate further. Since the prevailing attitude at the more dovish State was that there was no military solution to the crisis, the only way forward was for the shah to find common ground with a moderate opposition. To this end, Ambassador Sullivan and his senior officers were instructed to redouble their efforts to identify and reach out to said moderates. Simultaneously at the National Security Council, Brzezinski’s prevailing view was to embrace the shah’s “red and black” conspiracy theory, the belief that the religious zealots marching in Iran’s streets were the dupes, unwitting or otherwise, of the communists waiting in the wings to take over. This view had been reinforced by the Soviet-backed communist coup in neighboring Afghanistan the previous spring, and was reinforced again in mid-November when the leader of Tudeh, Iran’s Soviet-allied communist political party, publicly endorsed the leadership of Ayatollah Khomeini. Further, Brzezinski simply didn’t believe the shah was in that much trouble; to the contrary, with the Iran situation entering another of its periodic lulls on the immediate heels of Sullivan’s alarmist early November memos, the national security advisor pegged the ambassador as a hysteric. The clear way forward, in Brzezinski’s mind, was for the shah and his generals to crush the opposition.

One predictable result of all this was that the shah heard an increasingly mixed message from Washington. Another was that those American officials who were most closely monitoring events in Iran and who probably had the firmest grasp on the situation were no longer talking with each other. “It seems incredible to say now,” Gary Sick said, “but those of us who were tracking stuff on a daily basis—and this was a very small group of people—we were never able to just sit down together and compare notes. We weren’t allowed to. I couldn’t talk to the CIA or see their files. There were a couple of people over there who’d share things with me on an unofficial basis—and at great risk to their careers—but on an official basis, nothing. As for State, it wasn’t until the whole thing was over and I was given access to their files that I finally saw all this stuff I’d never seen at the time.”

Nowhere was this rupture more evident or destructive than between the NSC’s Sick and the Iran country director at State, Henry Precht. The two had first met in the 1960s when both were stationed in Alexandria, Egypt, and had maintained an easy, collegial friendship ever since, their involvement with Middle Eastern affairs ensuring their paths crossed quite frequently both at work and socially; so often did they attend the same dinner parties that by the late 1970s their wives had become friends as well. Their relationship frayed in tandem with the worsening of the situation in Iran and the divergence in the views of their superiors, Brzezinski and Vance.

“Henry saw me as Brzezinski’s guy in all this,” Sick explained, “which was never actually the case. I never bought into the idea that the Soviets were orchestrating things, for example, but as time went on, I think he increasingly saw me as the enemy. It got to the point where I couldn’t even talk to him on the phone; he’d just scream at me for all the messed-up things we were supposedly doing.”

At least on this point, the two officials found agreement. “I suppose I did rant and rave at him,” Precht later conceded, “because I was so deeply frustrated that he was supporting the Brzezinski line and wouldn’t listen to any other argument.”

Yet amid this increasingly rancorous relationship, it seemed the Iran country director was propelled by two very different impulses.

By November, it had been almost two months since Precht had experienced his morning-shower epiphany about the shah’s ultimate demise, but save for his brief outburst in the October meeting with British Foreign Office officials he’d kept this view largely to himself. Instead, in public he continued to toe the party line that all was well. Appearing on The MacNeil/Lehrer Report on November 3, he was asked point-blank if he believed there was any chance that the shah might be forced from Iran. “I said without a moment of hesitation that there was no chance at all of that happening,” Precht recalled, “while not believing that myself. In fact, I lied.”

At the same time, the State official waged a stealth campaign to get others to appreciate the gravity of the crisis, urging the Tehran embassy to expand their outreach to the shah’s opposition and to be more explicit in their reports back to headquarters. He also tried to get the Washington press corps to show more interest in the smoldering brush fire in the Middle East, going so far as to buttonhole the CBS News anchor Marvin Kalb at a dinner party to tell him his network was missing a very big story out of Iran.

But Precht was also eager to play a central role in the Iran drama for as long as possible, as was made clear in a curious statement he made to an interviewer in 2000. “There is a period when a crisis is developing in which the desk officer is in complete charge,” he explained, “because no one above him knows anything about it or takes any interest in it. Then there is this golden moment when the senior [leadership] takes an interest and they ask the desk officer’s opinion.” In Precht’s telling it was during this golden moment that he could control the Iran narrative—“this was my chance to brief people”—before the crisis developed to a point where the leadership took over and he, the desk officer, was relegated to the margins. Precht returned to this same point years later when, speaking of his career before an auditorium of State Department employees, he remarked that the Iran crisis had been one of those “rare happy moments” when a relatively low-level desk officer could have a profound impact on policy. In essence, as the Iran crisis worsened, Precht, the government official most closely monitoring its daily progression, was paradoxically trying to both stay in the background and maintain a seat at the decision table for as long as possible.

In hindsight, though, Precht, too, regarded the rift that developed between him and Gary Sick that autumn as not only absurd but “disastrous for American policy.”

None of which meant exoneration for the man who stood at the center of this maelstrom: the King of Kings. After all, to be buffeted by contradictory streams of advice is not an affliction exclusive to heads of state but a part of everyday life that most people learn to successfully navigate. The shahanshah was uniquely susceptible to paralysis over mixed messaging because he was uniquely susceptible to paralysis. This was clearly illustrated during another trek that William Sullivan made to the royal palace on November 24, less than a week after he and Anthony Parsons had called upon the king in his Niavaran study.

Learning that his ambassador in Washington had been invited to a troubleshooting session attended by both Zbigniew Brzezinski and Cyrus Vance at the White House, the shah wanted Sullivan to explain the significance of this meeting of the American “high command.”

Sullivan tactfully offered that the administration was hoping for “more vigorous leadership” on the shah’s part and went on to offer a series of simple recommendations that might serve that end. What about a television appearance? The shah shrugged and pointed out that “it was a question of what to say.” Or goodwill visits to some of the friendlier provinces, a way to show that the monarch was still fully engaged and in command? “He seemed to consider this seriously for awhile,” Sullivan reported, “but finally let it lie there.” The same response awaited Sullivan’s suggestion that he meet with representatives from various sectors of the body politic. It seemed quite impossible to enthuse the shah about anything, to penetrate his all-embracing inertia.

But much like Sullivan’s previously rosy view of the Iran political situation, the ambassador may have been myopic about something else, that being so often in the shah’s presence, he wasn’t noticing the kinds of physical changes in the monarch that might have been apparent to someone with less constant exposure. By late November there were growing signs this was the case.

On November 21, the U.S. secretary of the Treasury, W. Michael Blumenthal, called on the shah at Niavaran. It was almost exactly a year since the two had first met, during the shah’s tumultuous visit to Washington in 1977, and Blumenthal was stunned by the changes in his host. As he reported back to Washington, “The conversation was halting. There were long periods when the shah simply trailed off and stared into space.” When Blumenthal returned to Washington, he was even more blunt. “We’ve got a zombie out there,” he told President Carter. “I hope we have someone else in mind, because he’s not going to make it.”

The king appeared even more listless at a meeting with another visiting American official, the Senate majority leader, Robert Byrd, a few days later. First during a meeting in the royal office and then over the course of an extremely awkward lunch, the monarch barely said a word but vacantly gazed up at the ceiling while his wife carried the conversation. William Sullivan had often characterized the shah as “tired” or “subdued,” even “depressed-looking,” in his dispatches back to Washington, but he’d never described anything quite like this.

One perfectly plausible explanation was that the shah, not the most effervescent personality at the best of times, was being weighed down by the daily litany of bad news in his kingdom. Yet there was another possibility. It took the form of a secret that had been hanging over the Peacock Throne for several years, one that, even in November 1978, was officially known to only eight people in the world. One of those eight was Farah Pahlavi, the empress of Iran.

* * *

On a morning in late November 1978, a small motorcade of armored limousines slipped from a side gate of the Niavaran compound and made for a private home in the northern suburbs. Concealed behind the tinted windows of one of the cars was Farah Pahlavi, and her destination was the home of an aunt with whom she was very close, Louise Ghotbi. Once inside the walls of the Ghotbi residence, the shahbanou stepped from the car and into the embrace of the waiting older woman, who then led her up the entranceway steps and through her front door.

The driveway greeting was at least partly for show, a public display for the benefit of watchful eyes, because the queen’s purpose in coming to Shemiran that day wasn’t to visit her aunt but rather to see the man who, by the time of her arrival, had been waiting in the Ghotbi drawing room for half an hour. He was a trim, ruggedly handsome man of sixty-two whose deep-lined face and closely trimmed moustache might put one in mind of an aging French matinee idol. Such a comparison would surely have pleased Shapour Bakhtiar no end, for he was both vain and a lifelong Francophile. More to the point that November morning, he had emerged as one of the very few opposition figures left in Tehran who might still be willing to negotiate with the shah. As a tentative first step, the king had enlisted his wife to meet with the politician and sound him out. By chance, the queen and Bakhtiar were distant cousins, related through Louise Ghotbi, and it was she who had seen to the arrangements of their discreet conference.

“After introducing us,” Pahlavi recalled, “she left us alone in the living room and we talked for about an hour.”

It was to be some time yet, but from that initial meeting with the empress in the Ghotbi home, Shapour Bakhtiar would emerge as one of the more pivotal—and certainly more tragic—figures to take to the stage in the final days of the Iranian Revolution.

Playing the role of palace envoy was becoming something of a habit for the shahbanou. Just a week earlier, on November 19, she had made a one-day visit to Iraq, where, in addition to conferring with the strongman Saddam Hussein, she’d made a pilgrimage to the holy city of Najaf to meet with one of the most senior religious figures of the Shiite faith, Ayatollah Qassim al-Khoei. The hope was that she might somehow persuade al-Khoei to issue a statement in support of the shah, but in this she was disappointed; while al-Khoei said he would pray for the King of Kings, he refused to involve himself in Iranian politics and went on to upbraid the queen for her Westernized dress and manner. Pahlavi had returned to Tehran in a bitter frame of mind.

That brief sojourn in Iraq also returned her to a role she had long fulfilled in Iran: royal punching bag. Ever since she had become queen in 1959, traditionalists had grumbled about Pahlavi’s modernist ways, insinuating that she was forever seeking to build her own power base at the expense of her husband. These mewlings grew after the shah bestowed on her the title of shahbanou in 1967, an honorific for which there was no precedent, and were becoming a full-throated chorus in late 1978 as the national crisis deepened. It mattered little that such overtures as the meetings with al-Khoei and Bakhtiar were conducted at the king’s request: To the degree the queen’s hand was seen, or imagined, in almost any endeavor, it fit nicely into the long-standing campaign of both palace intriguers and the opposition to cast her as a Persian Lady Macbeth.

By the last months of 1978, however, these mounting criticisms of the queen also had the effect of diverting attention from a fundamental question: Where was the shah in all this? Obviously, it wouldn’t do for the King of Kings to bow down before some Iraqi ayatollah or slink off to a Shemiran salon to meet an opposition politician, but just what was the shah himself doing to preserve his throne? Save for those select retainers residing within the Niavaran walls, weeks could go by in which he was virtually invisible to his subjects, with not a glimpse of him on the television or a word from him on the radio. Moroseness, even depression, was one thing, and perhaps understandable given his current circumstances, but the king’s behavior increasingly seemed to find answer in a secret that lay at the heart of the Iranian imperial court.

Fully five years earlier, in the autumn of 1973, the shah had complained to his palace confidant, Asadollah Alam, of feeling tired much of the time. With the king’s lethargy continuing, in the spring of 1974, Alam, who was already receiving medical treatment for leukemia, summoned his two French doctors from Paris: He was experiencing complications, he told them, and needed to undergo a hemogram, or full-battery blood exam, right away. While there was a halfway-plausible explanation for why Alam might not entrust this routine task to a local doctor—like royal palaces the world over, the walls of Niavaran had ears—more puzzling was the instruction that the French doctors bring all the necessary testing instruments with them.

When the Frenchmen reached Tehran, they learned the truth; as a healthy-looking Alam explained with a broad smile, they had actually been summoned to examine “my boss.” In short order, the doctors were taken up to Niavaran under police escort and led into a hidden alcove just off the shah’s office. There they performed a quick examination of the King of Kings—one of the doctors would recall a Renoir oil painting on the wall—and drew blood for the hemogram.

Their diagnosis was serious, but not altogether dire: The shah was suffering from something called chronic lymphocytic leukemia, a normally slow-developing cancer of the blood that targets white blood cells. The good news was that with proper treatment the monarch might live for many more years. But not forever, of course; since the disease attacked the immune system, it almost inevitably meant a somewhat shortened lifespan depending on how rapidly the lymphoma spread and the overall health of the patient otherwise.

Initially, only five people knew of this diagnosis: the shah and Alam, the two French doctors and the royal physician. With his paranoia for once probably quite justified, the shah swore the others to silence, stressing that if word got out, it would be open season for his ministers and generals to start intriguing against him and for his Western allies to scout for a younger and more pliant ruler. No one else was to know anything, not even his wife.

While two more doctors, one French and one Iranian, were eventually brought in on the secret, maintaining it required an increasingly herculean effort. By 1975, the king required new hemograms to be done nearly every month, but insisted that the French medical team administer them. Consequently, members of the team made a total of some thirty-five clandestine flights to Iran over a three-year span, usually flying out of Paris on a Saturday afternoon in order to be whisked into Niavaran Palace on Sunday morning and then make it back to their respective medical practices in France by Monday. There were several times when it appeared the grand secret must be uncovered, when palace courtiers took note of strange Frenchmen in the palace halls, or when a foreign ambassador observed that the shah, so fatigued lately, seemed suddenly quite buoyant, but incredibly, the system held. Surely not a coincidence, it was also precisely at this juncture that the shah began to finally implement the sorts of governmental and economic reforms he had long talked about as necessary before handing over the reins to his son Crown Prince Reza. In both action and spirit, by 1976 the King of Kings appeared acutely aware that if he was not technically dying, his clock was inexorably running down.

Then, in the spring of 1977, the medical team deemed that for the shah’s own benefit the circle of silence needed to be expanded to at least one more person: the shahbanou. Since it was doubtful such a meeting could be held in secrecy in Tehran, it was decided to take advantage of the queen’s brief layover in France following a goodwill tour of the United States that June.

Pahlavi was stunned by what the doctors told her—doubly so. First was the shock of learning her husband suffered from an incurable illness, but this was joined to the realization that he had kept this news from her for more than three years. What’s more, she couldn’t reveal to him what she now knew, since his doctors had informed her without his knowledge and sworn her to secrecy as well. “So I had to play this kind of game for some time,” she recounted in her Washington, D.C., home, “because I couldn’t let on that I knew he was sick. That was extremely difficult, because when someone you love is ill, of course you want to comfort them.”

That charade mercifully ended when the shah at last agreed to bring his wife in on the secret. When next the French medical team came to Tehran, they met with the queen and, in a bit of theater for the benefit of her husband, gave a watered-down version of the information she already knew. “So at least then we could talk about it,” Pahlavi said, “but I still wasn’t supposed to know how serious it was.”

As a result, a new kind of buffer arose between husband and wife, one that would remain until the very end. Since they never discussed his condition frankly, even today Pahlavi wonders how much her husband truly grasped of his situation, though she suspects he knew it was bad all along. “I doubt that a man of his intelligence,” she wrote, “who was also very careful about his health, could not have had, from the beginning, a clear picture of the unavoidable tragedy that awaited him.” As evidence, she pointed to a number of occasions when the shah complained that he was running out of time, that he simply didn’t have the years left to see all the changes he wished to make in Iran. Yet, she acknowledged, “to this day I have never stopped wondering how much he knew.”

Also quite impossible to know is how much this element of artifice over the shah’s health might have affected the course of the revolution. That said, it does raise two core questions.

First, how was it possible that for four years the American government never had so much as an inkling of the deteriorating health of one of its most important, and ever more endangered, foreign allies? When one contemplates the vast and varied breadth of American ignorance of all things Iranian by the autumn of 1978, this may be the most astonishing deficiency of all.

Second, what did the French know? Is it conceivable that for more than three years French security failed to notice that some of their nation’s most prominent hematologists were regularly jetting off for visits to a foreign city a full seven-hour flight away, only to return a day later? In fact, it was very conceivable in the far less security-conscious era of the 1970s, but what if a French intelligence official at the Quai d’Orsay had noticed and thought to question those hematologists as a matter of national interest? What is provable, though, is that in contrast to the United States and most other Western European governments, the French steered a decidedly neutralist course in the Iranian crisis, up to and including providing the shah’s chief nemesis a safe haven and platform from which to address the world.

“I’ve always had my suspicions that someone in French intelligence knew,” Gary Sick said. “Not that the information necessarily went all the way up the line to the president, because French intelligence has always been extremely compartmentalized, but when you look at the whole picture, the way they handled Khomeini, it sure looks suspicious.”

On the day that the queen met Shapour Bakhtiar at her aunt’s home, the Iranian regime was bracing for its next great test, a particularly formidable one. It was Muharram, the most sacred month of the Muslim calendar and in Shia Islam a time of extraordinary passion, of mourning and penitence. As determined by the lunar calendar, the religious observances of Muharram in 1978 would commence on the night of December 1 and reach their climax ten nights later on Ashura, the day of atonement. Marking the martyrdom of Imam Hussein, the Prophet’s grandson, at the Battle of Karbala in 680, the traditional form of observance of Ashura is for Iran’s faithful to take to the streets in mourning processions, spectacles in which Hussein’s martyrdom is reenacted in great passion plays as pilgrims grieve and penitents whip themselves bloody. With emotions during Muharram always hypercharged, in 1978 Prime Minister Azhari foresaw the potential for those emotions tipping into antigovernment mayhem and initially ordered a nationwide ban on processions. Just days before Muharram was to start, however, he struck much the same deal with moderate clerics that his predecessor, Sharif-Emami, had done two months earlier: So long as the faithful stayed to prescribed routes and refrained from “political demonstrations,” Azhari announced, he would permit the processions to go forward and keep security forces at a respectful distance.

But of course, everything was “political” in Iran now, and no sooner had Azhari made his compromise announcement than, from Paris, came the news that Ayatollah Khomeini was urging his followers to engage in “direct confrontation” with the security forces, “to arise and sacrifice your blood.” Even more ominous was his call for seventy-five volunteers to don the white shrouds of martyrdom, to sacrifice their lives at the hands of the shah’s soldiers in replication of the seventy-five faithful who had been slaughtered with Imam Hussein at Karbala. In Khomeini’s cold-eyed calculus, the shah’s soldiers would surely gun down the faithful—and probably far more than the requisite seventy-five—but eventually they would recoil and fall away; when they did, so would the shah’s regime.

Anyone tempted to regard Khomeini’s edict as a bit of medievalist fantasy was soon set right. As the first day of Muharram approached, reports from across Iran told of a shortage of the white cloth required to make death shrouds. From Qom came the news that in that city alone the call for seventy-five shahids had brought forth seven thousand volunteers. The anxiety of the moment was palpable in a cable Ambassador Sullivan sent to Washington on the afternoon of December 1. “As we enter the eve of Muharram,” he wrote, “the mood in Iran is extremely tense. People of all persuasions expect bloody clashes between religious demonstrators and troops throughout the country.” In case the point wasn’t clear, he added, “We find many responsible people who say they are personally prepared to be martyrs during this period.”

In contrast to their usual dry tone, this last cable from the American embassy before the onset of Muharram carried the tinge of fearful awe, as if all were bracing for a terrible storm about to break.

Chapter 14

By early December, Neauphle-le-Château had taken on a carnival atmosphere. Once past the police barriers that restricted vehicular traffic into the village, great crowds of Shiite pilgrims from across Western Europe—and not just primarily young men anymore, but busloads of women of all ages clad in ankle-length black chadors—swirled through its streets. There they brushed against young mullahs and elderly ayatollahs with flowing white beards, journalists from all corners of the world hauling notebooks and tape recorders and television cameras. All clamored for an audience or even a mere glimpse of the man at the center of this firmament, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini.

Another much sought-after figure in this mix was Ebrahim Yazdi. As one of Khomeini’s closest advisors, he spent most of each day navigating a tiny orbit between the two rented bungalows, sitting alongside the ayatollah to translate yet another interview with the Western press, stalked by other journalists and favor seekers hoping for their own moment before the revolutionary leader.

If exhilarating, after two months in France, the strain of living under the microscope of world attention, of being constantly beseeched and pursued, was starting to wear on everyone in Khomeini’s inner circle. This was probably especially true for Yazdi and his two nonclerical colleagues, Sadegh Ghotbzadeh and Abolhassan Bani-Sadr. The so-called three viziers had never been particularly close, but in Neauphle-le-Château, Yazdi increasingly found the charming Ghotbzadeh too glib for his own good, the intellectualizing Bani-Sadr pedantic and ponderous. For their part, neither Ghotbzadeh nor Bani-Sadr fully trusted Yazdi, sensed in his cool, methodical manner a constant grasping for power. At one point, after Yazdi had suggested to a group of foreign journalists that he was serving as Khomeini’s chief spokesman, an anonymous sign was posted in one of the bungalows stating that no one spoke for the ayatollah. Within a short time and by unseen hand, the sign was torn down and thrown away.

Surely adding to the tensions in early December was a feeling among many around Khomeini that the revolution was beginning to flag—or at least increasingly be co-opted by others. There had recently been a string of small setbacks to support this view. Immediately after the installation of the military government in early November, Khomeini had called for a nationwide strike in protest. That strike on November 12 had been an utter failure, with just a handful of shops and offices closing in Tehran, and all but ignored in the provinces. That stood in contrast to another general strike called for two weeks later by Khomeini’s clerical rival, Ayatollah Shariatmadari, that had effectively shut down the nation. The tacit duel between the ayatollahs became even more pronounced with the onset of the holy month of Muharram. In prelude, Khomeini had urged his followers to “stage direct violent confrontation” with security forces and issued a call for martyrs, while Shariatmadari beseeched his followers to march peacefully and avoid marring the religious occasion with politics. To a remarkable degree, and to the astonishment of almost all observers, including those at the American embassy, the voice that won out was Shariatmadari’s. Across the breadth of Iran, tens of thousands of religious protesters took to the streets on the night of December 1, and by morning they had been joined by hundreds of thousands—perhaps millions—more, and while there were occasional clashes with security forces, the orgy of bloodletting many had expected didn’t come. By the following afternoon, the two sides had put out their usual fantastically divergent casualty counts—to the regime’s claim of eight protesters killed, some opposition figures claimed up to seven hundred dead—but almost all independent monitors concluded the state’s numbers were vastly closer to the truth.

Just as unexpected was the ensuing calm. Over the next several days, American embassy officials discreetly toured a number of Tehran hot-zone neighborhoods and found them almost unnervingly serene, with most shops open and the occasional band of street-corner demonstrators dwindled in size to a few dozen. It appeared the shah and the moderate opposition had won a most unexpected victory. Certainly no one was writing Khomeini’s epitaph yet, and just ahead lay the true testing days of Muharram, the mass mourning processions of Tasua and Ashura—December 10 and 11—but as the first week of December drew to a close, there was a palpable sense that the conciliatory voices of men like Shariatmadari might at last be winning out over the firebrand in Neauphle-le-Château.

But there was at least one individual in the Khomeini camp who seemed little perturbed by this trend of events: Ebrahim Yazdi. To the contrary, the doctor from Houston saw considerable short-term benefit in the quieting taking hold.

As a younger man, Yazdi had voraciously read accounts of successful revolutionaries around the world, the tracts of everyone from Mao and Trotsky to Algeria’s Ahmed Ben Bella and Cuba’s Castro. As a result, and perhaps more than most of his colleagues in Neauphle-le-Château, he had become increasingly convinced that the Iranian Revolution wouldn’t be won on the barricades. Rather, the contest would primarily be decided by psychological warfare, and to achieve victory, the revolutionaries needed to win over or neutralize three distinct blocs of actors: the Iranian military, of course, but also the shah’s foreign sponsors and that great mass of Iranian citizenry who, consistent with the masses in most any revolution, sat on the sidelines. What made this campaign tricky was that all three blocs needed to be dealt with simultaneously, and that failure with any one all but ensured failure with the other two. Conversely, success with one increased the odds of winning over the others.

Somewhat counterintuitively, swaying the great multitudes of Iranians looked to be the easiest task. In emulation of previous successful revolutions, one way to achieve this was to make everyday life as uncomfortable as possible, and a handy tool in this regard was workers’ strikes. Iran happened to have a proud tradition of both muscular labor unions and successful labor strikes, as the previous government of Prime Minister Sharif-Emami had been reminded when a series of industrial actions effectively shut down the country. Those strikes in September were largely over economic issues, and Sharif-Emami had dug his way out of the problem by essentially throwing money at the workers. By December, though, the various work stoppages occurring around the kingdom had a more distinctly political hue—workers wanted the shah to step down and vowed to stay off the job until he did—and this was an issue pay raises couldn’t solve.

Further, it wasn’t as if the entire nation needed to go out on strike, only those sectors that caused the most disruption to the regime and the lives of average citizens. Although broken up by the state in mid-November, weeks of sporadic strikes in the vital oil fields had robbed the regime of desperately needed foreign revenue and threatened fuel oil shortages in the coming winter. By early December, a strike among workers at the national bank was wreaking havoc with money transfers, debt payments and company payrolls. It was a tough-love approach to winning the hearts and minds of the masses, but eventually most Iranians would come to embrace the revolution if only to end the daily deprivations that accompanied it.

What’s more, this was a situation perfectly suited to the exiled Khomeini’s strengths and for inflicting collateral economic damage that the regime could do little to stop. On November 22, for example, Khomeini had issued an edict urging Iranian citizens to support the striking oil workers—except the oil-field strike had been broken a week earlier, and oil production on November 22 was back up to near its “peacetime” average. No matter; across Iran, Khomeini’s call caused car owners to fear that a new round of fuel shortages was on the way, triggering a run on gasoline stations and snarling fuel distribution systems for days. To the car owner who wasted half a day sitting in a gas line, blame attached to the regime, not to Khomeini. By early December, and largely acting on Yazdi’s counsel, the ayatollah was issuing a steady stream of strike calls designed to paralyze key sectors of the economy.

When it came to neutralizing that other great bloc of Iranians, the shah’s army, Yazdi believed the opposite approach was needed. While attacking armed soldiers with stones and Molotov cocktails was an effective way to amass more martyrs, and thus produce more protesters, by December 1978 it was clear that appeals to a common humanity were actually having a more deleterious effect on the morale of military units. By then, demonstrators encountering skirmish lines of soldiers often broke into a rhyming chant of “Soldiers, soldiers, why do you shoot your brothers?”—a question sure to resonate in an army heavily composed of conscripts. Borrowing a page from the Vietnam War protesters of the 1960s, marchers had taken up the practice of fraternizing with the security forces and placing flowers in the muzzles of their guns. In the quasi-religious political processions that regularly passed through Iran’s towns and cities, women and children increasingly took their place in the front ranks. From the state’s standpoint, it was all having a corrosive effect. Desertions from army ranks, once unthinkable, had begun as a trickle in the autumn but were growing to a steady stream as winter drew near. A few months earlier, few would have doubted that if the shah ordered his army to employ “the iron fist,” the rank and file would comply. By December, that appraisal was questionable, and becoming more so all the time.

And if the shah lost the people and the army, it left very little role for his foreign benefactors to play. There was still a long way to go before that blessed day was reached, but in the meantime Ebrahim Yazdi saw the vital importance of convincing those Western powers that were so heavily invested in the shah—and this meant especially the United States—that they had little to fear if he were overthrown and an Islamic republic installed. Part of this mollifying campaign needed to take place in the streets of Iran, of course, so the more peaceful the demonstrations, the better, but the most crucial battlefront was right there in Neauphle-le-Château. This was a theater of operations for which Dr. Yazdi was uniquely suited.

Largely at his instigation, both the atmosphere and the priorities of the Khomeini encampment had undergone dramatic transformation. In his first days in France, the ayatollah had only sporadically met with foreign journalists and made little effort to conceal his contempt of them. By December, and under Yazdi’s tutelage, the cleric frequently submitted to four or five interviews each day. Sometimes these were with small groups of journalists hand selected by Yazdi, but these were interspersed with lengthy one-on-one encounters with those outlets, like American news networks, that the doctor deemed especially important. For those interviews conducted in English, Khomeini, who spoke only Farsi and Arabic, would sit impassively atop his carpet in one of the bungalow sitting rooms while Yazdi knelt at his side to translate both questions and answers.

Another refinement the Houston doctor brought to the process was insisting that in order to “give coherence,” interviewers submit their questions in writing well ahead of time: the night before for sessions scheduled for the morning, in the morning for those slated for afternoons. This wasn’t for the purpose of careful reflection or coherence. As is plain to anyone who has ever observed a press conference, journalists in a scrum tend to ask the same few questions, slightly rephrased, over and over again. After the first handful of interviews by Western reporters in Neauphle-le-Château, Yazdi was rarely required to do much new translating at all, but could simply repeat the same answers to the same questions asked previously. Yet there was a distinct method to these repetitions, and that was to cast Khomeini as a modest and reasonable man, one whom the Western world—and again, most especially, the United States—had little reason to fear. In this casting, there would be no mass retribution against the shah’s minions when victory was achieved; the rights of minorities and women would be faithfully upheld; there would be a democratically elected parliament in which all political parties would be invited to compete. And yes, while it was true that many of the arms contracts the shah had brokered might have to be modified, and Israel would no longer be sold Iranian oil, beyond this there was little reason to believe that Western relations with an Islamic Iran would be much different than they’d been with an imperial one. On those rare occasions when an enterprising Western journalist asked a more probing question of Khomeini, Yazdi offered a reply worked out in advance, and on those less rare occasions when Khomeini went off script and muttered something incendiary, the doctor simply avoided translation. Given the demands of the news cycle—and everything related to Iran had now sped up—those Western journalists given audiences in Neauphle-le-Château rarely had the time or resources to have the ayatollah’s words independently translated, so Yazdi’s version usually carried the day. The professor from Baylor was also attentive to optics. Early on he noticed a pronounced tremble in Khomeini’s left hand; during interviews, he had the elderly cleric hide this hand beneath his robes and hold it in place with his right.

In all these efforts, Yazdi was aided by another characteristic of Ruhollah Khomeini’s, a most unusual one. To the cleric’s solemnity, his seeming impenetrability, people brought their own projections; as the historian James Buchan eloquently put it, “He had, more than any man of his generation, a talent for sitting still.” In that stillness, others tended to find what they wished.

But as their time in France extended, Yazdi also realized that none of this was quite enough, that if the revolutionary forces were to win American acquiescence to the shah’s downfall, they needed to reach into the halls of power and decision-making of Washington. Thus far, his attempts to do so had failed. Back in October, the former CIA officer Richard Cottam had tried to get the NSC’s Gary Sick to meet with Yazdi, but that plan was scuttled. So was Yazdi’s prospective meeting with the State Department’s Iran desk officer, Henry Precht. By early December, however, the doctor felt it imperative to try again. While the term “spin” didn’t yet exist in the lexicon of public relations, it was for this express purpose that Yazdi pitched up in Washington on December 12, just as the emotional high-water mark of Muharram, the two-day mourning processions of Tasua and Ashura, had concluded.

Depending on one’s perspective, it was either awful or very fortuitous timing. As many had predicted, the Ashura processions had been some of the largest in decades, with estimates of those marching in Tehran alone ranging from one to three million, an astounding number for a city of five million. As many also predicted, the processions took on a strongly anti-state cast, with some of the faithful interspersing their lamentations for the martyrdom of Hussein at the hands of the caliphate ruler Yazid with calls for the death of “the new Yazid,” meaning the shah. What far fewer had predicted, though, was that the massive marches of December 10 and 11 would be almost as peaceful as those that had marked the onset of Muharram. Across Tehran and a hundred other Iranian towns and cities, the marchers, often including entire families, had maintained an almost Prussian-like order, scrupulously keeping to prescribed procession routes, shushing and shaming the more boisterous youths in their midst, showering the security forces they encountered with flowers and sweets. To be sure, the marches were a repudiation of the shahanshah, but if any element of the opposition had also seen their stock fall by their peacefulness, there was little doubt it was the hectoring ayatollah in his French exile.

That certainly seemed to be the view in Washington, as Ebrahim Yazdi discovered on December 12. A few days earlier, President Carter had given a tepid answer when asked if he thought the shah would survive the current crisis. Now, in the immediate wake of the Ashura high-water mark, the King of Kings was clearly riding high with the Americans again. “I fully expect the shah to maintain power in Iran and for the present problems in Iran to be resolved,” Carter proclaimed that morning. “I think the predictions of doom and disaster that came from some sources have certainly not been realized at all. The shah has our support and he also has our confidence.”

But not if Yazdi could help it. Sitting for an interview with The MacNeil/Lehrer Report that same afternoon, the doctor bravely insisted that the orderliness of the Ashura processions was thanks to the discipline and calming influence of Khomeini-appointed parade marshals, skipping over the fact that most such marshals were actually acolytes of the moderate Shariatmadari. Carrying the point further, Yazdi stressed that the massive turnout on Ashura once again showed the people wanted an end to the dictatorship but, much like the civil rights marchers in the American South in the 1960s, were determined to achieve it by peaceful means.

Henry Precht, the Iran desk officer, had been invited to appear in the same MacNeil/Lehrer segment with Yazdi but reluctantly declined; the same State Department stricture against having contact with the Khomeini camp that had scuttled an earlier proposed meeting with Yazdi remained in place on December 12. On the other hand, Precht reasoned this stricture couldn’t possibly be so broad as to extend to a “chance encounter” with Khomeini’s advisor at a Washington restaurant. In a bit of diplomatic sleight of hand, Precht suggested to the MacNeil/Lehrer producers that after Yazdi’s taping they take him to dinner at Dominique’s steak house in downtown Washington. When Henry Precht and Ebrahim Yazdi met at the steak house that evening, it marked the first time that an American government official had sat down with a member of Khomeini’s inner circle since the Iranian Revolution began.

Precht’s report of that meeting, classified as secret and disseminated to only five other government officials, speaks to a mutual wariness between the two men. Finding Yazdi a “reserved, exceedingly calm, but very persistent idealist,” Precht parried with him over the true significance of the peacefulness of the Ashura marches just concluded, suggesting it was a defeat for Khomeini. To the contrary, Yazdi insisted that Khomeini’s “people in Iran had planned the demonstrations to show to the outside world that they were capable of absolute discipline and a peaceful expression of their views. He felt they had succeeded enormously.”

Instead, the doctor stressed, the sheer numbers that had taken to the streets during Ashura were final proof, as if any more were needed, that the shah was truly finished. Yazdi couldn’t have known it—and Henry Precht certainly wasn’t going to share the information—but at Dominique’s restaurant he happened to be talking to the one American official who’d come to that precise conclusion several months earlier.

Over the course of their long conversation that night, Yazdi spoke expansively about what a future Islamic republic in Iran would look like—the people would “enjoy full freedom of speech and the press” in a participatory democracy—but was unequivocal on the need for the monarchy to be abolished. He was a good deal coyer in alluding to the “great danger” that the United States currently faced, suggesting that unless it soon withdrew its support of the shah, it was likely to share his fate. Precht called his bluff: If Khomeini called for holy war against the shah’s regime, he asked, “would the ayatollah [also] call for violence against Americans?” That was a real possibility, Yazdi said, particularly if administration officials continued to make such laudatory statements about the shah as President Carter had offered earlier that day.

Despite the guardedness of their meeting, the two men agreed to stay in private communication. While unsanctioned by their superiors, this Yazdi-Precht connection was to prove to be a vital link between the administration and the shah’s enemies in the weeks ahead.

But on the evening that he sat across from Henry Precht for the first time, Ebrahim Yazdi was also acutely aware of the Achilles’ heel in the campaign to put a kinder, gentler face on Ruhollah Khomeini. That heel took the form of the raft of incendiary sermons and homilies the ayatollah had written or delivered over the years, a body of work that had accelerated in both quantity and vituperation over the course of 1978. Yazdi was probably less concerned about a paper trail—since Khomeini’s writings were banned in Iran, few Iranians had ever actually read his treatises—but a far more immediate danger to the makeover efforts was the vast number of Khomeini sermons and edicts that had been recorded and disseminated throughout Iran on tape cassettes in recent months, angry screeds that called for the death of the shah and other “apostates,” that heaped abuse on the monarchy and Jews and Bahais in equal measure. At their meeting, Precht had asked after a recent sermon in which Khomeini allegedly called for “torrents of blood” to flow in Iran. Yazdi had heatedly denied the allegation, attributing it to SAVAK disinformation, but how long before some American official decided to translate and transcribe some of those tapes? Surely American witlessness had to crack at some point.

In fact, both CIA and American embassy officers stationed in Tehran had been collecting great bundles of these tape cassettes for some time, discreetly purchasing them on the black market or having their local staff obtain copies from fundamentalist mullahs. But on this front, Ebrahim Yazdi needn’t have worried. Among those Americans gathering the Khomeini cassettes, none spoke Farsi, and even in December 1978 only one, a CIA officer, had reportedly been curious enough to have a tape transcribed. “Reportedly” because due to the ongoing embargo on its Iran files being shared, the CIA had never passed that transcript on to either the NSC or the State Department. As for all the other cassettes, they would remain tucked away in embassy and CIA desk drawers, never listened to or transcribed, for the next year.

Consequently, the comment Henry Precht made at the close of his report on meeting Yazdi carried an element of unintended humor: “I had the impression that the Khomeini organization is very amateurish in its handling of PR and contacts with foreigners.”

* * *

What Farah Pahlavi remembers most vividly about the month of Muharram in 1978 was the chants at night. They usually began just after the evening prayer or with the onset of curfew, when the first of what would rapidly grow to tens of thousands of Tehranis took to their rooftops to praise God and Khomeini, to call for the death of the king: Allahu-akbar, Javid Imam Khomeini, Marg bar shah. Hour after hour it went on, overwhelming all other sounds of the city except for the occasional crackle of gunfire from somewhere in the darkness. The queen was told that many of the chants and gunshots were tape recordings that the opposition was replaying endlessly over loudspeakers, but that didn’t make things any easier. “Even in the palace, it was impossible to block out the sound,” she recalled.

Especially difficult was trying to explain away the calls of “Death to the shah!” to her two youngest children, Ali Reza and Leila, then twelve and eight. That these were the same two children who would subsequently commit suicide appeared to touch a nerve. “It frightened the littlest ones,” Pahlavi said tightly. “Naturally, it frightened them.”

Desperate to escape the confines of Niavaran, a few days before Christmas the shah and shahbanou took their family skiing in the nearby Elburz mountains. The outing was going well until one of the children spotted “Death to the shah” graffiti splashed along a retaining wall. That same evening, the parents decided to send the three children still in Iran on to the United States to join their eldest brother, eighteen-year-old Crown Prince Reza.

But in December 1978 it wasn’t only the world beyond the palace that was turning on the royal family. One day the queen noticed with a start that one of her favorite secretaries, a young woman who had been with her for many years, had abruptly taken to wearing a religious headscarf. “She had never worn one before,” the queen said. “But of course, I couldn’t say anything.” The shift was especially noticeable among the lower-level household staff, the maids and gardeners, the drivers and waiters. Almost by the day, they appeared to grow a little less attentive, a little more distant, to even display a trace of insolence at times.

The king’s aide-de-camp, Kambiz Atabai, had a particularly startling indication of how much had changed while conversing with one of the shah’s personal butlers, Mohammad Hassasi, one morning. In 1965, Hassasi had saved the shah’s life by using his own body to block the door to the royal office against a would-be assassin; even after being shot in the hand, the butler stood his ground. As to be expected, Hassasi had enjoyed favored status at Niavaran ever since, extending to having his son inducted into the elite palace bodyguard. In the autumn of 1978, however, that same son had gone over to the revolutionary side, and while being served tea one morning, Kambiz Atabai offered his condolences to the father, idly mused how anyone could think someone like Khomeini capable of running a country. To Atabai’s surprise, the other man took great offense. “I am devoted to His Majesty,” Hassasi said, “but I am also a follower of the Imam. I will not have anyone disparage the Imam in my presence.”

On that morning, the thought crossed Atabai’s mind that the crisis in the kingdom might end in wholly unexpected fashion, not with a military crackdown or a revolutionary takeover but by the hand of someone—a gardener, a butler—within the walls of Niavaran itself. The queen had much the same feeling. Gazing out a palace window one evening and listening as the nightly chants grew, she thought to herself, “They’re going to kill us.” Although she couldn’t explain why, she found this thought strangely calming.

* * *

On the morning of Tuesday, December 19, 1978, Henry Precht sat at his desk at State Department headquarters to compose a letter. “I have held these thoughts for a long time now,” it began, “but as we come nearer to the day of investigations, I have decided to put a few of them down on paper.”

The “thoughts” the Iran country director referred to derived from the epiphany he’d experienced three months earlier that the shah was finished, an epiphany that, for a complex assortment of personal and professional reasons, he’d kept largely to himself. His reference to “investigations” had to do with the storm of recriminations he suspected was about to envelop official Washington centering on the question, who lost Iran?

It would be hard to imagine a more thankless posting anywhere in the American government in 1978 than that of Iran country director at State. In his understated way, Precht had tried time and again to warn his superiors as the crisis escalated, only to have those warnings ignored. Part of the problem had been the simple tumble of world events. With eerie consistency, turning points in the Iran crisis had occurred at those precise moments when the president and his foreign policy advisors were distracted by other, more pressing matters elsewhere: the protracted Arab-Israeli peace talks; the ongoing SALT II negotiations with the Soviets; a bloody coup in Afghanistan; the eruption of leftist insurgencies in Central America and Africa. In all this, how much attention to devote to some Tehrani street agitations that the shah could quash whenever he chose?

Along with this were the frustrations that came when the administration’s senior ranks did start paying attention, but in almost uniformly blundering fashion. When asked at a breakfast meeting with reporters in early December if the shah would survive, the president had given an astoundingly halfhearted assessment—“I don’t know, I hope so”—and then let the matter dangle for the next five days. Finally clued to the anguish his comments were provoking in Tehran, Carter then offered his fulsome praise and support of the king. It was this same tribute that caused Ebrahim Yazdi to so bristle when he and Precht met for the first time at the Washington steak house. It capped a remarkable achievement: In the span of a mere five days, Carter had managed to question the shah’s ability both to withstand and to reinforce his image as an American toady; to both encourage and enrage the king’s enemies.

The first letter that Henry Precht wrote on the morning of December 19—there would be a second—was to his immediate supervisor at the State Department, the assistant secretary of state for Near Eastern affairs, Harold Saunders.

At the time, there were still many in the administration who believed the shah, having weathered the recent high-water mark of Ashura, could yet salvage a diminished role for himself on the Peacock Throne. Much of this belief, in Precht’s view, was a form of wishful thinking, rooted in an abject fear of what a shah-less Iran might mean for the United States. Rather than address this fear directly, in his letter to Saunders, Precht examined each principal rationale for continued American support of the king and, over the course of six single-spaced pages, methodically knocked down each one. The salient point, he stressed, was that the administration needed to accept what was already lost in order to prepare for what was coming. “This paper proposes that we begin to move now with definite steps toward a post-shah future in Iran,” he wrote. “We delude ourselves that we can get anything better in the short run.”

If blunt, Precht’s letter to Saunders didn’t exactly constitute a profile in courage; the two men were longtime friends, and the assistant secretary largely agreed with his subordinate’s views. The second letter Precht wrote that morning was a good deal riskier. It was addressed to Ambassador Sullivan in Tehran, and it centered on the backroom machinations of the administration official both men had come to regard as their chief nemesis: National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski.

After reading Sullivan’s “Unthinkable” memorandum in early November, Brzezinski had embarked on what amounted to a freelance Iranian initiative, first to gather his own version of facts and then to pursue his own line of advocacy. In pursuit of the former, he had enlisted a former CIA station chief in Iran to undertake an independent investigation on the ground in Tehran. In pursuit of the latter, he established an unauthorized line of communication to Ardeshir Zahedi, the Iranian ambassador to the United States. Regarded as a hard-liner when it came to finding a solution to his nation’s crisis, Zahedi was very much in tune to Brzezinski’s unleash-the-hounds way of thinking, and through November the two men had bandied about ideas on how to instill some backbone in the shah. At Brzezinski’s urging, Zahedi had flown to Iran to personally deliver this get-tough message until, following complaints from Secretary Vance and Ambassador Sullivan on the confusion this two-track approach was creating, Carter ordered his national security advisor to end his freelance operation.

By then, however, Brzezinski had concluded that the defeatist mentality infecting Iran policy wasn’t limited to the American embassy in Tehran but had thoroughly permeated the State Department. He’d also identified the chief doomsayer: the country desk director, Henry Precht. In early December, Brzezinski had summoned Precht to a one-on-one meeting at his office in the White House annex.

In Precht’s memory, that conference was businesslike, even cordial, until the national security advisor made it clear that the time for equivocating was over. “If I point a pistol at your head,” Brzezinski said, “and say to you, ‘You have to tell me what you honestly think is going to happen in Iran or I will shoot you,’ what would you say?”

Thus pinioned, Precht was finally blunt: “I would tell you that we have three months at the most for the shah. If we don’t work out some kind of deal between him and the opposition between now and then, he will be gone in three months.”

Very soon after that conversation, however, even this scenario seemed fanciful to Precht, that if there had ever been a chance for a deal to be struck that might save the shah, that moment was now passed. What’s more, he learned the Brzezinski-Zahedi back channel hadn’t actually been shut down at all. To the contrary, it appeared their hawkish line was gaining ever-greater sway at the White House. It was to alert William Sullivan to these machinations, “to bring you up to date on some very sensitive matters that I cannot commit to the phone or cable,” that Precht penned his “eyes-only” letter to the ambassador on December 19. Over the course of the three-page letter, he outlined what he saw as the destructive influence of “the Brzezinski-Zahedi channel” and its distraction from the crucial task at hand, “which seems to me to be one of finding a graceful exit for the shah while gaining a fair amount of credit in doing so for the U.S.”

In closing, Precht made a somewhat forlorn request of Sullivan: “I have probably confided more than I should to a piece of paper, but I doubt I have much of a future anyway. I would ask you to protect me for the sake of the education of the young.”

Yet in anticipating the recrimination battle he saw looming on the horizon, it would appear Henry Precht wasn’t totally bereft of bureaucratic street-fighter skills of his own. It seemed hardly coincidental that two days after Precht penned his two provocative letters to Saunders and Sullivan, there appeared in The New York Times an article scolding National Security Advisor Brzezinski for his alleged past inattentiveness to events in Iran. A chief source for the article was an anonymous State Department official.

But as events in Iran hurtled toward a climax that December, administration inattentiveness was hardly a past problem or an issue observed solely by Henry Precht. Even though he and Precht were no longer on speaking terms, it was at this precise moment that Gary Sick also concluded the shah probably couldn’t be saved. Racked with anxiety, the NSC officer chose to share this conclusion with his superior, Brzezinski, at an office Christmas party. The national security advisor briefly listened to Sick but, clearly annoyed by the interruption to the festivities, said, “Okay, write me a memo,” and walked away.

* * *

William Sullivan had already retired to the ambassador’s residence for the night when the call came in from General Gholam Azhari, the Iranian prime minister. “He asked in his gentle voice whether I could come to see him at my convenience,” Sullivan wrote. “I said if it was urgent I would come immediately, but he assured me that the next day would be timely.” In the ambassador’s recollection, there was nothing in Azhari’s tone to suggest the need for haste.

Then again, that was rather par for the course in official Tehran. By the time of Azhari’s call on December 20, it had been nine days since the high-water mark of the Ashura mourning processions. In their aftermath, Sullivan had informed Washington of the “mild euphoria of relief” felt by so many that the marches hadn’t triggered the predicted cascade of violence. But the ambassador had been down this road too many times to put much stock in the extending calm; inevitably, another flash point lurked somewhere on the near calendar, the only question being when and what form it might take. Until then, the opposition was taking advantage of the lull to plan their next pressure tactic, while the shah was taking advantage of it to do nothing.

Sullivan knew this wasn’t entirely true. The king had been profoundly affected by the magnitude of the Ashura marches, the sheer breadth of the opposition to his rule they revealed, and it had spurred him to new round robins of conferences with generals and ministers and favor seekers in his Niavaran office. To little ultimate purpose, however. During his own meetings at the palace since Ashura, the American ambassador had listened as the shah speculated on one possible path out of the morass before veering off to speculate on another, all destined to ultimately founder on his firm refusal to cede control of the army. Perhaps the forbearance required during these sessions made Sullivan less patient with others. On December 13, he’d been made to suffer through a meeting with a prominent Iranian banker who, in answer to the ongoing central bank strike paralyzing the nation’s finances, proposed to “organize a group of young intellectuals to try to introduce some perspective into political discussions taking place amid middle-class Iranians.” As an alternative, Sullivan suggested the banker organize a march of his colleagues on the central bank to beat up the strikers and take over their jobs.

Contributing to the ambassador’s dour outlook, Washington seemed determined to propel the crisis in just one direction: worse. Sullivan had been keenly aware of Zbigniew Brzezinski’s continuing meddling even without Henry Precht’s warning letter, and the get-tough message the shah was hearing from that quarter was simply adding to his regal torpor. Most of all, it seemed nobody in a decision-making capacity back in Washington grasped just how much America’s standing in Iran had plummeted. This obliviousness played out daily and in myriad forms. In response to a spate of attacks on the Bahai minority by opposition mobs, one State Department office had proposed issuing a public condemnation, and it took time away from more important matters for embassy officials to explain that, given the anti-American fervor gripping the kingdom, the only tangible result of such a move would be to increase the danger to the Bahais. Similarly, headquarters’ constant suggestions that an embassy officer be dispatched to talk with this or that moderate opposition figure failed to recognize that consorting with American officials was increasingly regarded as a kiss of death in Tehrani political circles, that such figures were now far more likely to hide from embassy officers than sit down with them. Indeed, just about the only somewhat bright spot Sullivan saw in the events of recent days had been Prime Minister Azhari’s deft handling of the Ashura marches, his wise decision to keep the shah’s soldiers well back from the processional routes. As Sullivan was to approvingly note in his memoir, “The opportunity for a political confrontation that might have settled the fate of the shah’s regime was thus averted by a Persian capacity for compromise.”

Consequently, the ambassador surely felt a sense of foreboding when, arriving at Azhari’s office on the following afternoon, the usual military aide didn’t usher him into the prime minister’s inner sanctum but rather led the way down a long corridor before coming to a small door. “He knocked gently, then opened the door into an unlit room,” Sullivan recalled. “As I stepped in, I saw a light go on in the corner and there, to my astonishment, lay Prime Minister Azhari on a small army cot covered by an army blanket and clad in striped pajamas.”

Motioning Sullivan to a chair beside the cot, Azhari explained that he’d had a mild heart attack the previous afternoon; it was after that attack that he’d called and asked Sullivan to come see him, insisting to his nervous doctors that his meeting with the American ambassador “was more important than anything else they could prescribe.”

Lying back on his cot and speaking in a low, somber tone, the prime minister methodically outlined the difficulties he’d encountered in trying to restore law and order since assuming office seven weeks before. All during that time, he explained, the shah’s constant instructions on how martial law was to be implemented—the soldiers were “only to fire in the air, no matter how badly they were abused”—had led to a complete demoralization within the military. But it wasn’t just the shah’s meddling on martial law. At the end of his disquisition, Azhari propped himself up on an elbow and fixed Sullivan with an intense gaze: “You must know this and you must tell it to your government. This country is lost because the king cannot make up his mind.”

With that, the ailing prime minister fell back onto his cot.

From the American perspective, accounts of what occurred next diverge in a significant way. According to Sullivan, he left Azhari’s bedside utterly convinced that the shah’s downfall was now inevitable. “Therefore,” he wrote in his memoir, “I intended to take the action I had prescribed in my November 9 [“Unthinkable”] cable and would begin talks with the opposition and the armed forces, designed to help them reach an accommodation that would prevent the disintegration of the military forces.” As incredible as the scenario he was proposing—an American ambassador was about to enter negotiations with opposition forces bent on overthrowing an American ally—the even more incredible detail, in Sullivan’s telling, was that his proposal elicited no response at all from the Carter White House.

This account is emphatically denied by Gary Sick. “That’s simply not the way it happened,” he said. “The White House didn’t respond, because Sullivan didn’t tell them what he was doing. The first time I or anyone else at the NSC knew he was talking to the opposition was when we read it in his book.” On this point, Sick’s version looks to be far closer to the truth. According to declassified documents, Sullivan’s first mention to Washington of his plans to negotiate with the opposition came on January 12, or a full three weeks later than he claimed.

In the meantime, though, more strangeness was afoot when Sullivan called on the shah the day after his bedside conference with Azhari. Rather than be fazed by his prime minister’s medical crisis, the king “looked more resolute and talked more defiantly than he has for months.” The reason, the ambassador soon discovered, was that the shah had moved on to his next gambit to stay in power.

Having already concluded that Azhari simply wasn’t up to the enormous task before him, the monarch had begun talking with a respected senior opposition figure named Gholam Saddiqi. As the shah explained, in addition to enjoying good standing within both the secular and the mainstream clerical opposition communities, Saddiqi was confident he could quickly round up the necessary range of national luminaries to fill out a coalition government. Such confidence was in exceedingly short supply in official Tehran as 1978 drew to a close, and the shah had instructed Saddiqi to proceed forthwith. In this regard, the news of Azhari’s failing health simply added an exotic element—urgency—to the enterprise.

But it was too little and far too late. The very next morning, December 23, there came news from Shiraz that an American oil executive, Paul Grimm, had been ambushed and shot to death by masked gunmen on his way to work. If impolitic to say, all deaths in a revolution are not equal, and when it came to the thousands who were to die over the course of the Iranian Revolution, the death of Grimm proved far more significant than most. Within hours, news of his murder had spread through Iran’s still-vast expatriate community, and what had been a steady flow of foreigners heading for airport departure lounges swiftly became a torrent. So massive was the sudden demand for flights that American and European companies competed to charter passenger planes to fly into Iran and get their people out.

And then the dam, or whatever was left of the dam, gave way completely. On Christmas Eve, gangs of armed young men took to the streets of Tehran smashing shopwindows, throwing Molotov cocktails and assaulting foreigners and Iranians who appeared to support the shah. A mob of some three hundred attempted to storm the gates of the American embassy, to be turned back by the embassy’s Marine guards firing tear gas. Elsewhere in the capital, security forces proved powerless to stem the gangs or even to reach many of the worst flash points. Their impotence was heightened by a tactic some militants had devised of forcing drivers to turn off their cars and hand over their keys, thereby turning Tehran’s perpetually clogged streets into de facto parking lots. Western embassies advised their citizens to keep a low profile and stay indoors as much as possible. With great speed, almost everywhere was the sense that matters were hurtling toward a conclusion, that the end was fast approaching.

Most everywhere, perhaps, but not yet at Niavaran, as Ambassador Sullivan discovered when he ventured back up the hillside on the afternoon of December 26. To be sure, he was met by a far more somber monarch than had been the case four days earlier, but even now the shah seemed not to grasp the gravity of his situation, calmly relating that his latest potential savior, Gholam Saddiqi, had just informed him that he probably needed six more weeks to put together a new government. Sullivan was momentarily rendered speechless. “At this point,” he subsequently reported to Washington, “I told the shah he was badly informed if he thought he had six weeks in which matters could drift.”

Thus pulled up, the King of Kings quickly descended into helplessness. If the Saddiqi “middle option” was gone, he explained, then his only choices were to either capitulate or turn to “the iron fist.” But not his own iron fist, mind; as the shah had outlined to Sullivan on several occasions and reiterated that afternoon, his generals had devised a plan whereby he might repair to an army base or a navy ship in the Persian Gulf while the military launched its crackdown.

To a greater degree than ever before, a note of contempt seeped into Sullivan’s dealings with the shah that afternoon. Abrupt capitulation would be a disaster, he told his host, a betrayal of all those people who had stayed on at his behest rather than flee. As for letting others wield the iron fist, “I asked who was going to be deceived by the sophistry of his presence ‘with the navy’ if he still remained the shah when the bloodletting took place…. Would Iranians think there was some magic insulation in the distance between Tehran and the Persian Gulf?”

And then the conversation meandered to the inevitable, to the same question the king had asked of the ambassador a hundred times in a hundred different ways: What did the United States want him to do? Ever the diplomat, William Sullivan had tried to finesse his answer just as often, but on that day he was finally blunt: “I said if he was trying to get the United States to take responsibility for his actions, I doubt I would ever get such an instruction from Washington. I said he was the shah and he had to take the decision, as well as the responsibility. My only advice at this time was that he did not have six weeks in which to remain undecided.”

When Sullivan left Niavaran that evening, it was to reenter a city descended into chaos, where burning buses blocked intersections and streets reverberated with the sound of gunfire, where bands of demonstrators were constantly forming and falling away “in an effort to accumulate enough people to attack some worthy objective.”

By the following day, the atmosphere was worse, and by the next day that much worse still. A few months earlier, the American embassy had begun periodically issuing situation reports—“sitreps”—that tracked the latest developments in Iran. By autumn, those reports had increased in frequency to almost daily, and now, in late December, they were going out every few hours, each one an updated catalog of disaster. “Strikes and shortages have halted normal life in Tehran and other cities,” read a typical passage in one of the December 28 sitreps. “Banking system and normal commercial life have ceased functioning…. Many Iranians and foreigners are already without heating oil; nearly everyone else will run out in a matter of days, and there is no resupply available for peak winter cold period. Gasoline lines, kerosene lines and visa lines at US consulate rival each other in length.”

As New Year’s Eve approached, the Niavaran palace compound increasingly took on the feel of both oasis and armed encampment, its perimeter ring of ornate gates now watched over by tanks and armored personnel carriers, the smoke-filled air filtering through its trees periodically spliced by the rotors of helicopters bringing in the latest contingent of generals to confer with the shah. It had been precisely a year earlier in this same compound that Jimmy Carter had stood before a banquet table to toast the shah on “the respect and admiration and love which your people give to you.”

Chapter 15

The King of Kings had never displayed a knack for small talk, and he probably should have known better than to try with Shapour Bakhtiar. Over the course of centuries, the Bakhtiari tribe of southwest Persia had earned a reputation of being among the most resistant to shahist rule, and Shapour Bakhtiar had paid a heavy personal price for maintaining his clan’s tradition. In 1934, his rebel father had been executed by the current shah’s father, Reza Shah, while more recently a cousin, Teymour Bakhtiar, the fugitive former head of SAVAK, had been assassinated by a shah-dispatched hit squad in 1970. Bakhtiar himself had been in and out of imperial Iran’s prisons ever since allying himself with Mohammad Mossadegh in the 1953 power struggle. Nevertheless, at their initial meeting at Niavaran that December, the shah thought to ask the dissident politician when their paths had last crossed. Knowing the shah hated to be reminded of the 1953 coup, the unseemly manner in which he had fled the country, Bakhtiar couldn’t resist the opening. “It was twenty-five years ago,” he responded matter-of-factly. “Surely you remember the date.”

Bakhtiar drew considerable pleasure at the sight of the king’s grimace.

“You haven’t changed a bit,” the shah replied drily.

It had been a full month since the queen had slipped away from Niavaran to meet with Bakhtiar at her aunt’s home. All that time, Bakhtiar, the third or fourth in line of the National Front opposition leadership, had been kept on the royal back burner, regarded as a possible replacement prime minister should General Azhari falter and no more prominent politician be induced to step forward. By the end of December, this precise scenario had come to pass, with Azhari felled by a heart attack and eager to quit and the more senior leaders of the National Front snubbing the shah’s overtures. When Gholam Saddiqi decided he needed six more weeks to build out a government, even the perpetually plodding king knew this was out of the question and had turned to Bakhtiar by default.

It surely pained him to do so. A graduate of the Sorbonne and a lifelong Francophile, Bakhtiar was a warrior in a way the shah had never been, having fought for France during World War II, first as an artilleryman and then with the French Resistance. Upon his return to Iran, he had emerged as one of the more spirited leaders of the banned National Front after the 1953 coup, enough to periodically come to the notice of the shah’s secret police. Over the subsequent two decades, Bakhtiar cumulatively spent some six years in prison on a variety of political charges but was obviously still slow to learn his lesson; in the summer of 1977, he was one of three National Front leaders to issue an open letter demanding democratization, thereby running the risk of imprisonment yet again.

Despite all this, in the autumn of 1978 Bakhtiar had made it clear to intimates that he was appalled by the increasingly theocratic tilt of opposition forces and by the number of his National Front colleagues now supplicating themselves before the likes of Ayatollah Khomeini. To the cosmopolitan and progressive Bakhtiar, there simply had to be some middle ground between the shah’s dictatorship and the one that Khomeini and his henchmen were intent on imposing, and he felt duty-bound to help find it. Following his clandestine conference with the queen in late November, he’d had several discreet meetings with American embassy officials as well as other palace intermediaries, many of whom found him an attractive potential replacement for the ailing Azhari. Of course, part of this attractiveness stemmed from a candidate pool grown smaller by the day.

At their meeting in Niavaran on December 29, the two former adversaries quickly agreed to a broad framework of understanding, the crucial point being that once Bakhtiar was installed as the new prime minister, the shah would leave Iran for “an extended vacation.”

But in his haste to forge a deal, it appeared Shapour Bakhtiar overlooked two salient details. In their negotiations, the shah had refused to formally cede control of the army and insisted on remaining as its official commander in chief. Perhaps his new prime minister designate concluded this was a matter of semantics—since virtually no one expected the shah to return from his “vacation,” what difference did his keeping a title make?—but in this Bakhtiar was grossly out of step with his opposition colleagues. After all, the shah’s control of the military had been the key component in the coup against Mossadegh—a coup that, lest one forget, went forward with the shah physically removed from the scene—so his formal surrender of that control now was the one precondition that almost all opposition leaders insisted upon. For failing to grasp or deliver on this point, by the next day Bakhtiar was formally expelled from the National Front as his colleagues of decades lined up to denounce him as a traitor.

Determined to put a brave face on matters, Bakhtiar insisted all would settle down and reason prevail once the shah left for his vacation, but he had overlooked something else during his talks at Niavaran: pinning down exactly when the shah intended to depart. Rather than a firm date, the king’s reply had been “soon.” Coming from a congenital footdragger, this was an unsettling choice of words at the best of times—and these were not the best of times in Iran.

* * *

After touring the riot-torn streets of Tabriz back in February 1978, Michael Metrinko had concluded that the mayhem was highly organized. “The rioters had specific targets in mind,” he reported at the time, “and the appearance of different groups in different parts of the city—groups well-supplied with flammable materials to start fires in very selective locations—presuppose a core of instigators who knew very well what they wanted to accomplish.”

Through the experience of many more civil disturbances in Tabriz in subsequent months, the American consul had somewhat backed away from this assertion. “I think it probably looked more systematic than it actually was—you know, this place destroyed, that place destroyed, but then this one left untouched. And then there were times when things felt they were about to explode, when this critical mass was building, but then it would suddenly stop, like someone flipped a switch. Why? Who knows? But I think initially a lot of us probably saw more method to it all than was probably true.”

But then something would happen to cause Metrinko’s appraisal to swing back the other way, to suspect a guiding hand amid the anarchy. A prime example was what occurred at the American consulate in Tabriz on December 30, 1978.

By then, Metrinko, the sole American diplomat in northwest Iran, had already endured a rather tumultuous stretch. Back in October, his report on an alleged mutiny plot on the local air force base led to his being hauled before a furious Ambassador Sullivan and threatened with the destruction of his career. In mid-December, by contrast, he’d been dispatched into the streets of Tabriz to verify reports, carried by The Washington Post and the BBC, of the mutiny of an armored battalion, of half a dozen rebel-seized tanks careening through downtown. Metrinko found no validity to the story, but while those findings were probably more to Ambassador Sullivan’s liking, they had little practical effect on the larger narrative: In the Iranian rumor wars of December 1978, the fable of the Tabriz tank insurrection quickly became established fact.

Then, fables no more. If not nearly to the same extent as in Tehran, by Christmas bands of young men armed with knives and metal rods and the occasional gun were roaming the streets of Tabriz unchallenged, smashing car and shop windows along with almost anything that even remotely symbolized the shahist regime. In his travels through the city, Metrinko discovered that the last vestiges of support for the monarchy were gone altogether; as he reported to the embassy, it was now the opinion of all his closest contacts, “in industry, among government, military and the police, that the shah must go.” Perhaps most ominous of all from the regime’s standpoint was a growing spirit of camaraderie between the two sides; as Metrinko noted in his report of December 29, the unit of soldiers detailed to guard the consulate compound “and the young men of the neighborhood (who often appear among the demonstrators) are engaged today in friendly football competition on [the] consulate playing field.”

By the next morning, the mood had darkened. Around noon, a motley band of protesters began forming at the consulate’s front gate under the watchful eye of the soldiers. Very quickly, the crowd swelled to the thousands, their paeans to Allah and Ayatollah Khomeini interspersed with chants of “Death to the shah” and “Death to America.” From the army commander on the scene, Metrinko learned that smaller but equally discomposed groups of demonstrators were gathering along the compound’s back and side walls. At about 1:30 p.m., and almost as if someone somewhere had fired a starting gun, the mob surged forward from all directions at once, with flying squads attempting to scale the side walls while a larger group tried to force the front gate. As the local army commander called for reinforcements and a helicopter was readied to evacuate Metrinko if necessary, the communications room at the Tehran embassy received a terse message: “Tabriz Consulate Under Attack.”

The demonstrators along the back and side walls were repelled by fire hoses and warning shots, but the contest at the front entrance was a lost cause. Tearing the metal gates from their moorings and setting an adjacent guardhouse on fire, the mob poured into the consulate grounds as Metrinko and his local staff retreated to the main consulate building. There, and with soldiers throwing up a protective screen, an extremely tense standoff ensued, the crowd baying for blood and the soldiers firing rounds over the heads of any who ventured too close. At long last, army reinforcements arrived, and after many more warning shots augmented with volleys of tear gas, the rioters finally retreated to the street, where they quickly dispersed. “And that was it,” Metrinko said. “Like a violent storm had swept through, and now it was over.”

In the aftermath, the consul determined the damage to the property to be minimal, that besides the ruined front gate and fire-singed guardhouse, the only discernible casualty was the missing consulate plaque that had been mounted over the main gate. “I assume someone took it as a souvenir,” Metrinko said, “or to sell in the bazaar.”

Concerned that news of the attack might have gone out on the international news wires, Metrinko sent a message to the embassy in Tehran asking that his parents back in Pennsylvania be informed that he was safe. He then put out an announcement that for the next week the American consulate in Tabriz would be “closed for renovations.”

* * *

For the seventy-eight-year-old Ruhollah Khomeini, each day at Neauphle-le-Château had become a test of endurance. Waking well before dawn, he spent half an hour or so in quiet reflection and prayer and then began the daily barrage of meetings and audiences: with his closest advisors; with clerics visiting from Iran and the greater Shiite world; more swarms of pilgrims seeking his blessings and more Western journalists seeking more interviews. There simply weren’t enough hours in the day to fulfill all that was asked of him, which made the generous time and attention he devoted to one particular meeting on the evening of January 4, 1979, that much odder. It was with an American businessman the cleric had never met before, Leonard Freeman, who ran a small import-export company out of Northvale, New Jersey.

To try to keep up with demand, by the start of 1979 almost all Khomeini’s interviews were now in group settings and with strict time limits set. For his conference with Freeman, the ayatollah gave over a full ninety minutes, with only two other men, the ubiquitous Ebrahim Yazdi being one, joining them. It was also at this gathering that Khomeini displayed a previously well-concealed gift for flattery. “I thank you for what you are doing,” he told Freeman, after intimating that his visitor could surely communicate with senior officials of the American government. “If the problem in Iran is solved, I will be grateful.”

On the one hand, the Freeman meeting suggested just how little the Khomeini camp understood the inner workings of the American government even as their revolution stood at the threshold of success. It also spoke to the paucity of their contacts with that government that they should look to the president and CEO of GLT Industries of Northvale, exporter of small marine engines and pneumatic pumps, as a liaison.

By the time of that meeting, it had been nearly two weeks since the long stasis in Iran had at last given way, with the rebels now clearly ascendant. Since then, the exodus of foreigners from the kingdom had accelerated, the Iranian military had become increasingly paralyzed, and the administration of entire towns and cities was being taken over by revolutionary vanguards—or komitehs as they would soon become known. Despite all this, the shah still hoped to cling to power, having named the National Front backbencher, Shapour Bakhtiar, to head the fourth Iranian government in five months before he left for “an extended vacation.”

For opposition strategists like Ebrahim Yazdi, it was this last bit of news that fundamentally scrambled the political chessboard. Abruptly, the shah’s proposed departure appeared to greatly diminish the possibility of overt American intervention in Iran—if this was in the offing, it surely would have happened by now—but to simultaneously increase the odds of a military coup. After all, as Yazdi and a generation of shah opponents remembered from 1953, the king had a talent for parking himself abroad while his generals performed his dirty work. There was obviously little Yazdi could do to directly forestall this scenario. What he could do, though, was redouble his efforts to convince the West, and especially the Americans, both that a generals’ coup would be a disaster and that they had nothing to fear from a future Islamist Iran. Yazdi had delivered this message in person to Henry Precht during their meeting in Washington in mid-December, and he’d subsequently turned to Richard Cottam, the former CIA officer turned university professor, to reinforce it. On December 28, Cottam spent all day at Neauphle-le-Château, conferring with Yazdi but also having a long meeting with Khomeini himself. Afterward, Cottam had flown on to Tehran to confer with his many contacts in the mainstream opposition.

While the heretic former CIA officer was effectively persona non grata in official Washington, that wasn’t true at William Sullivan’s embassy in Tehran. With the ambassador and most of his senior aides having now concluded the shah was finished, and with the shah himself talking of leaving Tehran, Cottam was brought into the embassy on New Year’s Day for a meeting with the political attaché. Much of their discussion was taken up with Cottam’s impressions of Khomeini and the scene at Neauphle-le-Château. According to Cottam, about half of the ayatollah’s retinue were Iranian foreign exchange students who had dropped out of their universities to work for the cause, and half were “young mullahs learning at the feet of the master.” Most of all, the attaché reported, “Cottam was struck by how little Khomeini’s ego appeared to be involved in [the] movement and [the] absence of deference patterns among those around Khomeini,” which was unusual in Shia clerical culture. From this, the former CIA officer had concluded that the ayatollah was both humbler and “much more liberal” than he had been led to believe.

On the strength of Cottam’s analysis, Ambassador Sullivan wrote a secret cable to Secretary Vance suggesting it was time for the administration to open up a discreet dialogue with the Khomeini camp, and recommended an overture be made to the man Cottam had identified as the cleric’s chief of staff: Dr. Ebrahim Yazdi. “I know Precht has already met with him,” Sullivan wrote of Yazdi. “He could perhaps be induced to visit Washington quietly and be asked to give no—repeat no—publicity to his meetings.”

Unaware of these machinations, Yazdi spent anxious days in France pondering how else he might get his message into the corridors of American power. Rather by default, he had turned to the visiting Leonard Freeman of GLT Industries.

In fact, the Freeman-Khomeini meeting was to yield impressive dividends. Throughout the ninety-minute session, Yazdi took copious notes of Khomeini’s statements, which he then read into a tape recorder and provided Freeman with a copy. The American businessman brought along that cassette when he knocked on the front door of the American embassy in Paris the following day and explained the reason for his visit. In due course, Freeman was shunted upstairs to two senior officers in the embassy’s political affairs division.

During their talk in the Neauphle-le-Château bungalow, Khomeini had repeatedly returned to the idea that with the shah removed, his movement planned to build a new Iranian society based on “humanistic values.” In this, he and his supporters felt a natural rapport with the American people since they, too, “are humanistic and civilized,” their only problem being with an American government that had imposed the shah’s “satanic regime” on Iran. “If foreign governments cease to support the shah, we will cease to hate them,” Khomeini told Freeman. “We have no animosity. If they continue to support the shah, that is another matter.” At the same time, the ayatollah emphasized, time was running out. “Young [Iranian] people are being killed every day, and I do not wish to see the people become pessimistic toward the U.S…. I don’t want to see the people’s pessimism go from the U.S. government to the U.S. people.”

Above all else, Khomeini stressed to Freeman, it was vital for the Carter administration to stand against a military coup in Iran, which he knew the generals were now planning. Should this coup come to pass and the Americans supported it, it would be a disaster for all concerned, but most especially for the United States.

One American who needed no convincing was Leonard Freeman. As he told the officials at the Paris embassy, Khomeini had struck him as “a simple man, a man of God, and a sincere leader of his people. [Freeman] said that he believed the long interview accorded him was intended as a gesture and an opening to the U.S.” This was the view of the embassy political officers as well. To them, it seemed clear the Freeman meeting had been a “tentative and indirect bid for dialogue” from the Khomeini camp.

But as the days of early January passed and Iran slipped further into anarchy, there was one person serving to burnish Ruhollah Khomeini’s domestic and international standing far more than anyone else: the King of Kings.

Long after stating his intention to leave Iran “at a convenient time,” the shah was still lingering about the palace, offering up a long list of parliamentary hurdles that Shapour Bakhtiar needed to clear—the presentation of a cabinet; approval of that cabinet by the Majlis, and then by the Senate—before he could possibly consider vacating the country. It was a nonsensical exercise coming from the man who had run roughshod over such parliamentary principles for a quarter century, and it seemed obvious to most everyone that even now the king was searching for some last-minute reprieve, desperate to spot some eleventh-hour savior come to his rescue.

For Ebrahim Yazdi observing from Paris, each passing day of this limbo came like a bountiful gift, for the longer the shah lingered, the more it destroyed any chance Shapour Bakhtiar had of creating some distance between himself and the monarch, of appearing to be his own man. At the same time, the shah’s loyalists in the army were psychologically adjusting to his publicly declared future absence. If there still remained the chance of some alternative to a Khomeini victory—a generals’ coup or a halfway measure like a Bakhtiar government—that prospect was withering by the day, expiring at the feet of a loitering shahanshah.

It was surely for these reasons that Ayatollah Khomeini made what, to the casual observer, seemed a surprisingly conciliatory statement on January 8. While being interviewed for a Lebanese newspaper, and with Ebrahim Yazdi again serving as his interpreter, the cleric called for an end to the attacks on soldiers in Iran’s streets, going so far as to claim these attacks were being carried out by pro-shah saboteurs. And while again demanding the shah leave Iran, he was curiously reticent when asked his view of the fledgling Bakhtiar government. “The ayatollah would rather not comment on this yet,” Yazdi said. “He is still pondering it and prefers to remain silent for the time being, because current circumstances are very delicate.”

In fact, the subtext to these utterances wasn’t hard to discern. First, the soldiers should join with the opposition, because now it was supposedly the shah’s own thugs, not the patriots, who were attacking them. Second, Bakhtiar could wait. Get the shah off the stage first, and then they would deal with his stand-in.

* * *

On the late morning of January 11, William Sullivan made the drive up to Niavaran for one of the last times. He had a blunt message to deliver to the King of Kings.

It was nearly two weeks since the shah had first talked of departing Iran, but he was still there. More than a week earlier, on the afternoon of January 3, President Carter had convened a meeting of his foreign policy leadership—Vice President Mondale, CIA director Turner, Brzezinski and Vance—and asked their counsel on whether he should pressure the shah to leave. Brzezinski had bristled at the very nature of the question—it suggested the shah was out of options, and this wasn’t at all the opinion of the national security advisor—but the others in the Oval Office urged the president to do so. Ultimately, Carter decided against the move, feeling it simply wasn’t his place to tell another head of state it was time to step down, with the result that the shah had lingered further, making the future viability of Shapour Bakhtiar’s government more doubtful by the hour. But no more. Just that morning, Sullivan had received instructions from the White House to go to Niavaran and, this time, tell the king to go.

To the ambassador’s amazement, though, the shah opened their meeting by running through the complicated procedural chain that still needed to occur before Bakhtiar’s government was officially installed. That afternoon, he explained, the prime minister designate would formally present his cabinet to parliament and then do the same before the Senate in two days. Parallel with this, the shah was settling on the final candidates for a regency council that would officially represent the crown during his upcoming absence. Once all this was taken care of, there was to follow three days of open debate in parliament—hopefully only three, provided the parliamentarians could be persuaded not to filibuster—with the formal investiture of Bakhtiar’s government then taking place on January 16. At that point, the shah expounded, there really shouldn’t be anything to keep him from leaving for his vacation the following day.

But William Sullivan was finished being diplomatic. Despite the extraordinary circumstances in which he found himself—he was literally urging a foreign head of state to quit his country—he had neither the time nor the energy for tact. After the shah finished reciting his protracted upcoming schedule, Sullivan recounted, “I told him my instructions were to advise him to leave ‘promptly.’ ” There ensued a brief tug-of-war over the meaning of “promptly” until the ambassador offered to consult Washington on the matter, stating he would let the shah know if January 17 wasn’t prompt enough.

Coming down from Niavaran that day, William Sullivan surely felt an enormous sense of relief, a final easing of the uncertainty that had haunted his days ever since returning to Tehran that summer. An indication of that relief was evident in the secret memo he sent to Washington a few hours later titled “Looking Ahead.” Speaking of the King of Kings, he wrote, “We must realize that he will no longer command any power in this country, either through the proxy of the regency council or the shadow of his role as command-in-chief of the armed forces. We must accept the fact that he will probably never be able to return to this country in any capacity.”

In light of this, Sullivan contended, it was time for the United States to pursue the course he had first laid out in his “Unthinkable” memo and to serve as the bridge between the forces of revolution and the powerful military the shah was leaving behind. In this way, the United States might yet salvage something of its long-standing relationship with Iran, as well as keep the kingdom from falling into the clutches of the communists—still a consuming fear of much of official Washington.

At the close of his memo, he turned to the question that had lurked in the back of so many minds as the shah’s position had deteriorated through that long autumn: After Vietnam and Cambodia and Laos, after so many American retreats around the world in recent years, had the administration done enough to save the Iranian leader? “I believe the U.S. government, and the president personally, have more than adequately discharged our obligations of loyalty to the shah,” Sullivan wrote. “We cannot—repeat not—by continued avowal of that loyalty, do for the shah what he has been unable or unwilling to do for himself…. In short, we must put the shah behind us and look to our own national interests as foremost in Iran.”

Yet even as the wheels began grinding to a stop in imperial Iran, there came a reminder of how slow the American bureaucracy had consistently been in responding to events there, of its almost willful lethargy. On January 9, or two days before Sullivan had gone up the hill to emphatically tell the shah it was time to leave, a report from the State Department’s Office of Human Rights had landed on the ambassador’s desk. In the process of finalizing its annual report on the human rights situation in Iran, the office was planning to report that while there had been a great deal of improvement in many areas, the shah’s government was still committing a variety of human rights violations, including arbitrary arrests and imprisonment and the use of excessive force against demonstrators. Sullivan was instructed to submit any comments or suggestions he might have within two working days.

* * *

When asked about her last days in Tehran, Farah Pahlavi’s expression darkened, and she seemed to withdraw into herself. “To be honest,” she replied after a long pause, “I don’t remember very much. Maybe it was a kind of…you know, self-protection.”

From others who were at Niavaran, there is a fairly comprehensive picture of how the royal couple spent those days. The queen busied herself by overseeing the packing of clothes and artwork and personal effects, trying to shield the two youngest children who still remained at Niavaran from the deepening melancholy that hung over the palace. Although the parting was difficult, it came as something of a relief when the children were flown out of Tehran with the queen’s mother, bound for the United States.

As for the King of Kings, he had lost a tremendous amount of weight over the past months, and this accelerated in January. Days went by when it seemed he didn’t eat anything at all, but remained in his office to greet the now-dwindling band of ministers and retainers and old friends who offered advice or came to say goodbye; in the recollections of many, he had taken on the gaunt frame and ashen appearance of a scarecrow or cadaver. To the degree that he spoke of the future at all, it was in easy platitudes: that his upcoming journey was only temporary, that he would return “once things settled down.” His actions belied these statements. He ordered the most important of the royal archives to be crated up and sent out on the same plane that took away his younger children and mother-in-law. From the Niavaran garden, he filled a vase with Iranian soil, a keepsake he would take into exile. As biographer Andrew Scott Cooper wrote, “Barricaded in the palace behind Chieftain tanks, sandbags, barbed wire, and machine gun nests, the Pahlavis were hostages to fortune, and rulers of a kingdom whose dominion had shrunk to the size of a small municipal park.”

They found little solace among the household staff. In the past, employment at Niavaran had bestowed the gardeners and maids with honor and the envy of neighbors, but now, as the historian Gholam Reza Afkhami noted, it brought insults and peril. “As it gradually dawned on them that the sovereign was preparing to leave, they became anxious about their own fate and the fate of their families. Their gloom darkened the air in the palace further, punctuating the hopelessness that pervaded every interaction.”

At one point, the queen was seized by a sudden defiance and told her husband she wished to stay behind. “I won’t do anything,” she said. “I won’t receive anyone, but I’ll be there in the palace, as a symbol of your presence.”

The shah rejected the offer, saying he didn’t wish to see his wife become a Joan of Arc.

Certainly, the shahbanou knew there was to be no return. As she wrote of her final days at Niavaran, “People went about their business as usual, but like robots, and sometimes I came across one of them weeping silently. I told them that we would be back. They wanted to believe it, just as we did, but deep down we all felt the same chill.”

* * *

On January 13, Shapour Bakhtiar announced the composition of the Regency Council, the supervisory body of senior officials and national luminaries who, at least in theory, would oversee the nation during the shah’s upcoming “vacation.” Among those little impressed by the concept was Ayatollah Khomeini. That same day in Paris, the cleric not only denounced the Regency Council as a sham but thought to co-opt the name by announcing the formation of something called the Iranian Revolutionary Council. Composed of august opposition figures, it would be this body, he declared, that would guide the future course of the nation.

At the same time, for those moderates and Western diplomats still hoping for a compromise resolution, the forming of the Regency Council came as welcome news: However transitory its existence proved, it at least meant the shah was running out of excuses not to take his leave. It also underscored the astounding sea change in attitudes that had occurred within these camps in a matter of weeks: from deep trepidation over what might happen in the shah’s absence, to grudging acceptance that he had to leave, to angry impatience that he still wasn’t doing so. A huge factor driving that sea change was the ongoing public relations campaign that Ebrahim Yazdi and other Khomeini lieutenants were orchestrating from Paris, the growing sense among both Iranian moderates and Western observers that perhaps they needn’t worry so much about the elderly cleric and his blustery talk after all.

But maintaining this softer image was always a close-run thing, constantly vulnerable to a fraying at the edges. One such episode occurred on the afternoon of January 13 when Khomeini granted an interview to the CBS News show Face the Nation. Pointing to the massive street processions during Muharram, the ayatollah asserted that the Iranian people “have proclaimed I am their leader and their only leader.” In that role, he intended to handpick a transitional government, which would lay the groundwork for the creation of a permanent government. With Ebrahim Yazdi at his elbow, Khomeini insisted he would have no official role in his appointed government, but “I will give them guidance. If I see some deviation or mistake, I will tell them how to correct it and give general guidance.”

To Khomeini’s interviewer this sounded quite a bit like dictatorship, and he followed up with a half question, half statement: “You will be, in effect, the strongman of Iran.”

At this, the ayatollah gave a slow, solemn nod: “You may assume so.”

* * *

As he had done countless thousands of times before, early on the morning of Tuesday, January 16, the shah emerged from the royal residence clad in a business suit and made the short stroll down the hillside to his Jahan Nama office. For the next several hours, he made telephone calls and received the usual stream of visitors, each meeting held and dispensed with in his typical brisk manner. The first departure from the norm came shortly after 11:00 a.m. when he returned to the royal residence and climbed the grand staircase to the second-floor living quarters. At about the same time, two military helicopters landed on the broad lawn alongside.

This in itself was not at all unusual—in recent weeks, helicopters had come and gone from Niavaran at all hours—but although no official announcement was made, within a few minutes word passed throughout the compound that the royal couple were about to leave. So quickly did this message spread that when the shah and shahbanou descended the main staircase and made for the front door, most of the extended household staff had gathered to line their path to say goodbye. To Kambiz Atabai, the shah’s aide-de-camp who trailed behind the couple and would follow them into exile, the experience was excruciating.

“There was moaning and crying everywhere,” recounted the historian Gholam Reza Afkhami, “and beating of the head and chest in the traditional style of mourning. Others seemed in a trance, emptily looking into space. Some threw themselves at the shah’s feet, begging him not to leave. The shah tried to comfort them as best he could. ‘No reason to worry,’ he said. ‘We are leaving for a long-needed rest and shall soon return.’ ”

It’s doubtful that even the King of Kings believed this anymore.

As a security precaution should one be shot down, the king and queen boarded separate helicopters, both of which immediately lifted from the lawn. They were soon joined by four more helicopters, and at the shah’s request all closed formation to make one last looping pass over the capital city before heading for Mehrabad Airport, fifteen miles to the southwest.

The evening before, it had been announced the shah would hold a press conference at Niavaran late that morning. Either this plan went by the wayside amid the confusion of the day, or it was a deliberate ruse to throw the international media off the scent, but as a result very few dignitaries or journalists of any nationality were on hand at Mehrabad when the helicopters touched down at about 11:45. In a perversely fitting coda, it was at this same moment that the American embassy sent a news flash to the White House stating that while they were picking up rumors of the shah’s imminent departure, embassy officials actually had no idea where he was or what his plans might be.

Two of the shah’s Boeing 707s were drawn up on the tarmac just before the main airport terminal, but the royal entourage didn’t immediately make for them. Instead, with the king a stickler for protocol to the end, he intended to remain on the ground, still officially Iran’s acting head of state, until the parliamentary vote formally endorsing the government of Shapour Bakhtiar was completed. With that vote just under way, the shah and shahbanou and their immediate retinue repaired to an airport departure lounge to await the outcome.

This delay allowed time for at least a handful of regime loyalists and foreign diplomats, apprised of the drama unfolding at Mehrabad, to climb into their cars and race for the airport. Consequently, when word of Bakhtiar’s formal investiture came in at about 12:30, a crowd of several hundred milled about on the tarmac outside the departure lounge. There now came a further wait as Shapour Bakhtiar, finally Iran’s official prime minister, left the parliament building downtown and made for Mehrabad aboard his own helicopter.

After a brief conference in the departure lounge, the shah and the prime minister emerged together onto the tarmac, the leaden-gray sky that had held all morning just then beginning to break slightly. Stepping away from Bakhtiar, the shah walked alongside his wife as they made for the waiting airplanes. As they did, the doleful scene that had played out at the palace was replicated, with friends and well-wishers surging forward for a last word, a last touch, tears streaming down faces. An army officer prostrated himself and tried to kiss the royal shoes, only to be pulled up by the king: “No, please, that is over now.” Even Shapour Bakhtiar, a man who had spent his life in opposition to the shah and seen his own father executed by the Pahlavis, was overcome by the emotion of the moment and repeatedly dabbed his eyes with a white handkerchief. At the base of the staircase leading to the first royal plane, the shah and shahbanou briefly drew up for one more round of embraces and goodbyes, then started up.

With the shah at the controls, the royal jet lifted off from Tehran for the last time at 1:18 p.m. At almost that precise instant, an earthquake measuring 6.7 on the Richter scale struck in northeast Iran, killing hundreds.

By most accounts, the shah remained at the controls of the royal 707 until it had cleared Iranian airspace, either for sentimental reasons or because he feared the flight crew might divert the plane to a hostile nation. He then rejoined his wife and very small retinue—fewer than a dozen people had flown out with him—in the main cabin. Having eaten nothing since early that morning, he asked if a lunch might be served, only to learn that the Mehrabad ground crew had refused to supply the plane with any provisions. What’s more, at some point in recent days all the imperial aircraft’s regular serving-ware, its crystal goblets and porcelain plates and golden spoons, had been pilfered. As a result, for his first meal in exile, the King of Kings was made to share the peasant stew prepared for his bodyguards and to consume it off a paper plate with a plastic fork.

Chapter 16

The instant the wheels of the shah’s plane lifted from the runway of Mehrabad Airport on January 16, it seemed all of Iran erupted in jubilation. In Tehran, millions took to the streets to cheer and chant and embrace. The more physically assertive among them saw to the task of pulling down and dismembering the many statues of the two Pahlavi monarchs, father and son, liberally scattered about the city. The celebrations continued well into the evening and, in many Iranian towns and villages, took on the feel of scavenger hunts, with crowds intent on finding and then destroying—burning, smashing or tearing to pieces—any conceivable vestige of the imperial regime. To avoid the ire of Khomeini supporters, the drivers in the American embassy motor pool hastily adopted the custom of the day and taped images of the ayatollah to the windshields of their vehicles.

The response was far more muted in the Neauphle-le-Château bungalow where Khomeini resided. By some accounts, the cleric displayed no emotion at all when told of the shah’s departure, but simply asked, “What else?” By other accounts, he gave a hint of a smile and muttered shahmat, or “checkmate.” Later that morning, and allowing time for the hundreds of foreign journalists now covering the Iranian crisis to decamp from their Paris hotels and reach the hamlet, Khomeini emerged from the bungalow to make a brief statement and take a few questions. As usual, translating those remarks fell to the acolyte at his side: Dr. Ebrahim Yazdi.

While congratulating the Iranian people on the day’s landmark event, the ayatollah stressed this wasn’t the final victory but merely the first step toward it. Victory would be achieved only with the complete destruction of the Pahlavi dynasty and the “usurper government” the apostate king had left behind. Offering that he would soon return to Iran, Khomeini pointedly addressed those who might still stand in the way of the revolution’s triumph, “who want to create disturbances through false propaganda and to create an environment for foreigners to intervene. I am warning that if they don’t stop, they will face a very severe destiny.”

This warning reflected the enduring suspicion within the Khomeini camp that the shah might yet attempt to regain power, suspicions that had spiked thanks to a last-minute shift in his travel plans.

Ever since he had announced his intent to take a vacation, almost everyone had assumed the shah would make for the same nation where his children and most of his extended family were now in residence: the United States. In fact, as late as January 11, five days before his departure, he and Ambassador Sullivan had discussed the arrangements surrounding his proposed stay at the Palm Springs estate of the philanthropist Walter Annenberg. At the same time, though, the king had floated the idea of stopping by Egypt to visit his good friend and political ally, Egyptian president Anwar Sadat, and over the intervening days what initially sounded to essentially be a refueling stop had taken on the trappings of a full-blown and open-ended state visit. When the Iranian imperial jet next touched down on the afternoon of January 16, it was at the airfield in Aswan, the principal city of southern Egypt, where, after a grand welcoming ceremony put on by Sadat, the exiled royal couple took up quarters in the penthouse suite of the Aswan Oberoi hotel with no immediate plans to venture any farther.

To opposition leaders like Ebrahim Yazdi, this change in plans suggested the shah was intending to linger “in the neighborhood” while his generals, with U.S. connivance, saw to the nasty business of crushing the rebellion and paving the way for his return. Time and again in those tense days of mid-January, the doctor from Houston had warned his Neauphle-le-Château colleagues of the possibility of a 1953 redux, and with the shah now loitering in Egypt, America’s newest ally in the region, the signs of conspiracy looked to be growing.

If Dr. Yazdi had been privy to the actual machinations occurring in the corridors of power in Washington just then, he might have been greatly relieved. That’s because, far from concocting a scheme to save the shah, the Carter administration was intensifying a dual-track approach to the Iran crisis to which from the standpoint of incoherence and guaranteed futility modern diplomatic history offers few parallels.

The seeds had been planted some two weeks earlier, at the same January 3 Oval Office meeting where, with the recent news that Shapour Bakhtiar was to be Iran’s new prime minister, President Carter briefly debated applying pressure on the shah to leave the kingdom. A chief reason this pressure wasn’t applied at the time was a fear that with Bakhtiar possessing no power base of his own, the senior ranks of the Iranian military, creatures created and utterly beholden to the King of Kings, might panic and start fleeing the country. This, in turn, would undoubtedly trigger the wholesale collapse of the armed forces before the Khomeini onslaught. Instead of the administration giving the shah a push, then, the most urgent need was for someone trusted by the Iranian high command to get to Tehran and impress upon the generals the vital importance of remaining at their posts when the shah left and giving Bakhtiar their full support.

As it turned out, there was one American military officer uniquely suited for this assignment: the deputy commander of American forces in Europe, the air force general Robert “Dutch” Huyser. Not only had Huyser been the on-site supervisor of a reorganization of Iran’s military command structure back in the early 1970s, but he’d stayed on close terms with many of its top officers through frequent visits to the kingdom, the most recent having concluded just that August. At the end of the January 3 meeting in the Oval Office, Huyser was reached at his headquarters in Stuttgart, Germany, and told to make for Iran with all due haste. The fifty-four-year-old general took these orders so to heart that he was already at the controls of a T-39 Sabreliner over the night skies of Switzerland before he realized he’d forgotten his passport.

While Robert Huyser’s mission to bolster Shapour Bakhtiar got under way in Iran, a very different enterprise was about to be launched in France.

For weeks, Ambassador Sullivan had urged Washington to make an approach to the Khomeini faction in Neauphle-le-Château, contending that even desultory dialogue was preferable to none at all. These suggestions were ignored. Sullivan had resurrected the idea on January 10, only to have Carter, swayed by the hard-line stance of National Security Advisor Brzezinski, scotch the proposal once again. Just four days later, however, and on the very eve of the shah’s exit from Iran, the president reversed himself, and a top-secret directive was sent to the American embassy in Paris requesting that they initiate contact with the Khomeini camp.

By a stroke of bad luck, the embassy’s chief Middle Eastern expert happened to be out with appendicitis. In his absence, the ambassador turned to his senior political counselor, a forty-four-year-old foreign service officer named Warren Zimmermann: “Why don’t you do it?”

Having no previous involvement with Iran, Zimmermann feverishly read up on the situation there, even as he sought the counsel of both French officials and Iran hands back in Washington on how best to make his approach. “There was some question as to who I should try to see,” he recalled, with some urging he extend feelers to either Sadegh Ghotbzadeh or Abolhassan Bani-Sadr, two of the more Westernized members of Khomeini’s entourage. The overwhelming consensus, however, was that Zimmermann seek out that member of the three viziers troika who appeared most constantly at the ayatollah’s side and who had already made contact with Henry Precht: Dr. Ebrahim Yazdi.

* * *

On the morning of January 15, 1979, a Monday, Warren Zimmermann drove a late-model Peugeot sedan out the stone gates of Paris’s Hôtel de Pontalba, the magnificent official residence of the American ambassador to France, and turned west. The Peugeot was the private car of the ambassador, Arthur Hartman, and had been selected for that day’s outing for the express reason that it didn’t bear diplomatic license plates and, thus, was unlikely to draw special notice.

Zimmermann’s destination was a small country inn about a mile east of Neauphle-le-Château. Following the coded instructions he’d been given, he turned in to the inn’s parking lot, parked and made for its front door. There he was confronted by a burly, bearded young man who, after scrutinizing the American diplomat, motioned him to a side room. It proved to be the inn’s dining room, and waiting for Zimmermann at the far end was Ebrahim Yazdi. Zimmermann would later tell an interviewer that the meeting made him “the first American intermediary between the Khomeini people and the United States,” but this was actually accurate only if the phrase “officially sanctioned” was attached. Ever since their unsanctioned meeting the previous month, Yazdi and Henry Precht had maintained a secret telephone correspondence, with Precht usually calling the doctor from the telephone extension in his home office in Alexandria.

The first meeting between Zimmermann and Yazdi was brief, about twenty minutes. After explaining he was not there to negotiate, only to relay information, the American political counselor essentially parroted the party line: that with the shah’s departure from Iran imminent, the Carter administration was intent on the fledgling Bakhtiar government having a chance to restore order. This meant it was opposed to a military coup, which also meant it was opposed to any rash action on Khomeini’s part, such as an early return to Iran, that might plunge the nation deeper into chaos and precipitate one.

For his part, Yazdi also stated he came not to negotiate but as a conduit for messages to and from the ayatollah. He outlined the transitional government the opposition intended to install, one that would lead to the ratification of a new constitution and, ultimately, the transfer of power to a democratically elected government. In the meantime, though, he was highly suspicious of American intentions—he asked several times why General Huyser had been sent to Iran and precisely what he was doing there—and warned that if a military coup did come off, popular rage would swiftly shift from the shah to those who had so steadfastly stood by him all these years: the Americans. At the end of their first encounter—both men would recall it as guarded but cordial—the two agreed to keep their talks confidential and established a system to meet again if future need arose.

That future turned out to be the very next day. Shortly after Zimmermann returned to the embassy and dispatched the account of his meeting to Washington, the State Department responded with a new set of questions and statements it wished to have conveyed to Khomeini. Zimmermann arranged to see Yazdi again at the inn early the next morning.

Over the following three days, the two intermediaries met four more times. Along with developing an easy rapport—Yazdi quickly took to calling Zimmermann by his first name—they jousted with each other in what amounted to a game of psychological bluff. This contest became especially pointed when, just prior to their second meeting, news came that the shah had finally left Iran.

Taking note of Yazdi’s abiding fear of a military coup—which, of course, translated as Khomeini’s abiding fear—Zimmermann allowed that while the Americans were working to stay the generals’ hands in the shah’s absence, that could prove impossible if Khomeini refused to reach some kind of accommodation with Bakhtiar. From the other side of the table, Yazdi tried to smoke Zimmermann out by claiming the opposition possessed concrete evidence the generals were planning a coup and suggesting the Americans must surely be aware of it too.

But when examined from a slight remove, the Yazdi-Zimmermann talks of mid-January revealed a pronounced imbalance in strategic dexterity. For the United States, the principal goal of the talks was obviously to gain a sense of where U.S.-Iranian relations might stand in the event of a Khomeini-led Iran, a concern spurred by an understandable fear of all it stood to lose with the demise of “the American shah.” On this point, Yazdi was reassuring—as he told Zimmermann, the economic and political interests of the United States and Iran were now so intertwined as to make future close relations all but inevitable—but he also knew that behind this American fear lurked an even greater one: that of a communist takeover in Iran. To a man like Yazdi, fully steeped in the currents of Iran’s opposition politics, such a scenario was patently absurd, a reprise of the tired red-and-black conspiracy the shah had been peddling for decades, but he also saw how this fear could be worked to his advantage. The doctor was aided in this by an invaluable bit of intelligence that had come his way just a few weeks earlier.

In mid-December, Yazdi had received an intriguing telephone call from a colleague in the Iranian-American dissident community, a political science professor at California State University named Mansour Farhang. A moderate Islamist long involved in the Iran Freedom Movement, Farhang had recently published an article in Insight Magazine detailing how Khomeini had come to dominate the anti-shah coalition. The article had come to the attention of a group of high-ranking Defense Department officials, who contacted Farhang and asked if he would be so good as to come into the Pentagon for a chat the next time he was in Washington.

By chance, Farhang was about to fly from California to Paris to meet Khomeini for the first time. A stopover in Washington would be easy enough to arrange, but his initial impulse was to steer well clear of the American military. Just in case, though, he decided to put the matter to Yazdi in Neauphle-le-Château. After discussing the situation with Khomeini, Yazdi called Farhang back. “It’s okay,” he said. “Go and see what they have to say.”

At the Pentagon, the professor was led into a large conference room—“twelve people were sitting there with yellow pads”—where he proceeded to give a two-and-a-half-hour seminar on the history and politics of the Iranian opposition movement. He finally realized he’d misread his audience. “I’m speaking of the Iranian situation as if it’s a gathering of academicians,” Farhang was to recall, “but what really was mind-blowing to me was the incapacity of these people to see a movement [outside] the Cold War framework. [To them] all revolutionary movements were pro-Soviet.”

In other words, no matter how broad-based the Iranian revolutionary movement was at the moment or how unifying a figure Khomeini appeared to be, the bedrock conviction of Farhang’s Pentagon listeners was that it was only a matter of time before the Reds usurped the cause and seized power. “This was the belief, and this belief was rooted in the Cold War framework,” Farhang said. “It had no evidence, but they assumed that it’s the only thing that can happen.” The professor tried to counsel otherwise, arguing that this belief represented a fundamental misunderstanding of Iranian society, but finally gave up.

Once at Neauphle-le-Château in late December, Farhang was taken into a bungalow sitting room for a private meeting with Khomeini and Yazdi. The very first question Khomeini put to him was “What was their concern?” Farhang explained that at this point, with the shah’s departure from the scene growing ever more likely, the abiding fear of all those officials he’d encountered in Washington was that Iran was about to go Red. If Khomeini and company could convince the Americans this wouldn’t happen, it would go a very long way toward gaining their acceptance of the revolution. Farhang’s advice appeared to be heeded: Very shortly after the professor’s arrival in France, Khomeini stepped up his denunciations of the Iranian radical left and insisted that communists would have no role in a future Islamist Iran.

Where this bit of intelligence played a crucial role was in the Yazdi-Zimmermann talks of mid-January. Until then, the only American official Yazdi had spoken with—and Yazdi was the only member of the Khomeini camp speaking to the Americans at all—was Henry Precht. With his much greater understanding of Iran, Precht had never bought into the Reds-under-the-bed scenario favored by Washington alarmists, and so had never emphasized that idea—or telegraphed that worry—in his talks with Yazdi. At the French inn, however, the less knowledgeable Zimmermann naturally parroted the prevailing Washington party line, contending that if Iran did descend into civil war, the communists would surely take over. Playing to this concern, Yazdi countered that while the Khomeini forces currently had the leftist threat well in hand, the most likely condition to provoke a Red takeover was a military coup. Indeed, the doctor argued—presumably with a straight face—there was already evidence of an “unwritten coalition” between the generals and the communists to work together in seizing the country. What played out at the inn outside Neauphle-le-Château was a fascinating game of late-stage Cold War brinkmanship, with both players raising the specter of the Red Menace in hopes of spooking the other. That said, it was a contest in which one player tipped his hand and the other held all the good cards.

The strategic imbalance also showed in the backgrounds and biographies of the two men who sat across from each other. Ebrahim Yazdi was both a consummate tactician and one thoroughly acculturated to the society that, at that specific juncture, was his enemy. He knew how Americans thought because he was one. Warren Zimmermann was also brilliant—he would go on to an illustrious State Department career that included serving as the ambassador to Yugoslavia—but he had absolutely no grounding in Iranian history or politics or culture. As a result, in his dueling with Yazdi he had no idea of what he might be inadvertently giving away. Nor, apparently, did those ostensibly more knowledgeable American officials composing Zimmermann’s talking points. On at least two occasions, Zimmermann was instructed to seek Yazdi’s help in arranging a repeatedly thwarted meeting between several senior Iranian generals and Khomeini’s envoys in Tehran, a nice little nugget of information telling Yazdi that, for all the American talk of standing resolutely by Shapour Bakhtiar, there were both top Iranian military officers and American diplomats looking to cut a deal. With each passing day, and with each new meeting with Zimmermann, the doctor from Baylor grew steadily more sanguine. As he would write in his memoir, “The chariot of revolution had already started, and no one had the ability to stop it now.”

Of what they were ceding to Yazdi at the French inn, American officials remained oblivious. To the contrary, they were clearly pleased at having managed to forge links with someone so senior in the Khomeini grouping and so adroit at addressing American concerns. As Ambassador Hartman noted to Secretary Vance in a secret cable on January 17, it was surely a positive sign that at Khomeini’s press conference the previous day marking the shah’s flight from Iran, it was Ebrahim Yazdi who had stood at the ayatollah’s side. “At that triumphal moment,” Hartman wrote, “Khomeini gave Yazdi a public status which no other member of Khomeini’s entourage here in France enjoys.”

Curiously, the American envoy who had spent the most time with Yazdi didn’t share these warm feelings. “I wasn’t the world’s foremost expert on Iran,” Warren Zimmermann said, “but I was pretty sure these people were not going to be friends of ours.”

* * *

When he had entered the inner office of the Iranian commander in chief on the afternoon of January 10, General Huyser had a good idea of what to expect. Sure enough, the five men gathered there turned to him with expressions ranging from anguished to stunned to baleful.

Huyser also had a good idea why: the screaming headline in that morning’s Tehran Journal that read “U.S. Policy Shift on Iran.” Citing anonymous but purportedly well-placed sources, the article reported that senior Carter administration officials were now pressuring the shah to depart Iran as soon as possible. Even by the leak-riddled standards of the Carter administration, this was a remarkable scoop—it wouldn’t be until the next day that Ambassador Sullivan received his instructions to tell the shah to leave “promptly”—and though he had none of the details, Huyser knew it meant he was in for a most unpleasant start to that day’s meeting at the headquarters of the Supreme Commander’s Staff (SCS). Awaiting his arrival were the five most senior commanders of the Iranian armed forces, four generals and an admiral, an assemblage that Huyser had taken to referring to in his secret dispatches to Washington as “the Group.”

“You must have read what this says!” one of the generals shouted, shaking the newspaper in Huyser’s direction. “Your ambassador is forcing our shah to leave his country!”

Pursuing the course he’d adopted since arriving in Iran five days earlier, Huyser first let the generals vent. He also appreciated that beyond their anger something deeper was at work, that each of the five commanders in that room—essentially the Iranian version of the Joint Chiefs of Staff—was, in his own way, reconciling himself to the reality that the shahanshah would soon be departing, most likely never to return.

At last, one of the generals gave voice to the thought that had lurked in all their meetings of recent days. “There are no alternatives!” he thundered. “What alternative do we have but to leave when His Majesty does, or else pull a military coup?!”

At this, Huyser finally reacted. “How on earth do you think you are going to pull a coup?” he asked. “Do you have plans? Are there plans that you have never told me about?”

The American general would remember that in the ensuing silence all five members of the Group bore the same blank look. “I therefore pressed harder,” he wrote, “because I wanted to reach the bottom line—to find an answer to the one question that had nagged me ever since my arrival: Did this group have secret plans for a coup that I didn’t know about?” But as Huyser gazed around at those in the room that afternoon, “at last I had found the answer I was looking for…. The Group had nothing.”

By nature easygoing and affable, Dutch Huyser had walked into a whirlwind upon reaching Tehran on January 5, his days and nights thus far given over to a staggering schedule of meetings and teleconferences. Interspersed with these were the hurried writing up of reports and the fielding of never-ending new sets of queries and instructions from Washington. The general had cherished those rare nights when he’d been able to steal four hours of sleep at a stretch.

His mission to Iran was a rather straightforward one—at least officially. Trading on his close ties with the Iranian military high command, Huyser had been directed to impress upon them the vital importance of remaining at their posts once the shah left and of transferring their allegiance and military obligations to the new government of Shapour Bakhtiar. But in fact, Ebrahim Yazdi was quite right in suspecting a hidden agenda to Huyser’s eleventh-hour mission. At the January 3 Oval Office meeting in which it was decided to dispatch Huyser, National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski had insisted that an ambiguous Option C be attached as a rider to Huyser’s brief: If the conditions in Iran continued to deteriorate, if Shapour Bakhtiar proved unable to put together a functioning government before the Khomeini juggernaut, then as a last resort the generals were to seize power. Left quite unresolved was what constituted a last resort or any mechanism for recognizing when it had been reached.

For Huyser, Option C actually posed little added burden to his mission: Whether it was Bakhtiar or the military who ultimately ruled, both scenarios required the generals to remain in place and to jointly work up comprehensive plans for taking control of the nation’s economic and military infrastructure. For the Iranian high command, however, adopting such a cooperative approach couldn’t have been a more foreign concept—as Huyser soon discovered.

On his first two days of meetings in Tehran, the American envoy had met individually with all five members of the Group. When he asked these commanders how they were preparing for the shah’s impending departure, none had an answer. Far from preparing, at least two appeared on the verge of nervous breakdowns. It got worse. The shah had always rewarded his senior commanders for their loyalty and obedience, not for their brilliance or self-initiative, and due to fears of a military coup his long-standing practice was to keep them separated from one another. As bizarre as it might seem in light of Iran’s protracted crisis, by the start of 1979 the five senior members of the Group had yet to even sit down in a room together, let alone engage in the kind of joint planning routine of armed forces everywhere. Military men the world over crave clear-cut instructions; in an extremely fluid environment, Robert Huyser was being asked to summon cooperation and creativity from a group of men who, under the best of circumstances, would have been hard-pressed to collectively pull off a surprise birthday party.

But little by little, progress was made. On January 9, just the day before that fraught encounter at SCS headquarters, Huyser managed to persuade the Group to sit down together for the first time. With a degree of wonderment, all agreed this innovation had the effect of streamlining communications and were further pleasantly surprised to discover they held very similar views on the best path forward. Since no contingency planning had been conducted, on that same day Huyser enlisted the planning staff of the American Military Assistance Advisory Group to sit with their Iranian counterparts in the various military branches and start devising blueprints for taking control of the nation’s vital infrastructure, its ports and oil fields and utility plants, should more peaceful methods to end the economic paralysis fail.

But one step forward, two back. At the conclusion of that January 10 meeting, Huyser once again emphasized the need for accelerated military planning, stressing that it was only by seeing to the nuts and bolts of mapping out logistics and supply lines and spheres of operation that the armed forces might succeed in upholding Bakhtiar or, conversely, launching a successful coup. The Group heartily agreed, except when the American MAAG planners showed up the following morning to continue working with their Iranian counterparts, they found the SCS planning offices shuttered. The reason? January 11 was a Thursday and, national crisis be damned, the first day of the Iranian weekend. Then there had been the shah’s own peculiar pronouncement when Huyser accompanied Ambassador Sullivan to Niavaran that afternoon. Told that Huyser had initiated the practice of meeting with the senior commanders as a group, the shah praised the sagacity of this approach, offering that cooperation was vital at such times—never mind that he’d continued his tradition of meeting with those same commanders separately as recently as the day before.

Huyser faced his most formidable challenge much closer to home, however. It took the form of Ambassador William Sullivan.

Sullivan had strenuously tried to torpedo Huyser’s mission to Iran upon first hearing of it. Having lost that fight, he had arranged an icy reception when the general arrived at the embassy on January 5. No sooner had the two exchanged pleasantries than Sullivan handed Huyser a telegram from Secretary of State Vance directing that the general talk with no one in Tehran until he received further orders. To Huyser, it appeared his mission might end before it began.

But this was not your run-of-the-mill bureaucratic turf battle, as the general soon discovered. Instead, Sullivan had already written Shapour Bakhtiar off as a lost cause. The best possible scenario, Sullivan opined, toward both ending the Iranian turmoil and enabling the United States to salvage something positive from the situation, was for the Iranian generals to forge a compromise arrangement with Khomeini. “I knew our differences of opinion were going to complicate my task,” Huyser wrote with considerable understatement. “It seemed strange to me that I should arrive in Iran with orders from the president to make every effort to help Mr. Bakhtiar, only to hear the president’s permanent representative talking of defeat even before the game had started.”

Both the general and his supporters back in Washington soon pushed back, but when he finally gained clearance to launch his initiative, an odd compromise was reached. First, Huyser’s time in Iran was to be brief: a matter of a few days at most. Second, he would meet solely with Iran’s military officers, while Sullivan would continue to handle all matters on the civilian-political front—meaning liaising with the shah for as long as he remained, and with Prime Minister Bakhtiar thereafter.

The first part of that arrangement nearly came to pass. On the same day as his tense encounter with the Group at SCS headquarters, January 10, Huyser had been scheduled to return to Germany, but an overnight snowstorm effectively shuttered the Tehran airfield. By that afternoon, the White House had reversed course and decided to keep the general on in Iran indefinitely. This didn’t alter the second part of the compromise. For the rest of his time in Tehran—thirty-one days, as it would turn out—General Huyser never met or spoke with Shapour Bakhtiar or any other Iranian civilian leader.

From the standpoint of unwieldiness, this was just the beginning. As an active-duty officer on special assignment for the White House, Huyser reported back to Secretary of Defense Harold Brown; General David C. Jones, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; and, upon occasion, the leading hawk in the administration, National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski. By contrast, Sullivan continued to report to his superiors at the State Department and to consult with perhaps the leading dove in the administration, the Iran country director, Henry Precht. This division of labor, combined with the time difference between Tehran and Washington, frequently led to the bizarre spectacle of Huyser and Sullivan standing side by side in the embassy’s secure communications room, each giving his own very different analyses of the day’s events to their very different audiences back in Washington.

But this was merely the most visible manifestation of a truly astounding development: In Iran, the United States was now pursuing two diametrically opposed policies, with the policy makers in each camp either unaware of or actively undermining the efforts of the other.

Ambassador Sullivan had never believed that Shapour Bakhtiar stood a chance, and by mid-January he was quietly meeting with those Khomeini-allied opposition figures, like Mehdi Bazargan, who might hasten Bakhtiar’s fall and usher in an Islamist government. At the same moment, to thwart such a government, Zbigniew Brzezinski was urging on the president that the time for a military coup, Option C, was rapidly drawing near, and none too subtly seeking to hold Carter to the deal they had struck. “If Bakhtiar fails,” Brzezinski wrote to Carter in a top-secret memo on January 13, “we must make a decisive choice and (Huyser’s) ‘C’ will have to be implemented with U.S. backing. I believe that is consistent with your original directive and, with your permission, I would like to communicate that corrective to General Huyser. It is important that he and his Iranian colleagues not entertain any illusions of what may have to be done in the event Bakhtiar falters.”

To complete this circle of lunacy, the American official designated to partner with the new prime minister, William Sullivan, was now actively working for his demise, while the American official trying to defend him, Robert Huyser, was barred from having any contact. Further, both rival policymaking camps were pursuing their agendas in the name of forestalling a Cold War doomsday scenario—a communist takeover—that no truly knowledgeable observer of Iran considered even remotely possible.

Perhaps equally bizarre under the circumstances, the two envoys at the vortex of all this fostered a friendship of sorts. This became especially true after January 10 when Sullivan invited Huyser to leave his temporary quarters and move into the ambassador’s residence. From then on, the two men shared breakfast most mornings and, schedules permitting, compared notes in the evenings over nightcaps.

At least initially, Huyser appeared to have the more accurate grasp on the situation. For weeks, Sullivan had warned that the Iranian army was likely to rapidly disintegrate when the shah left the country, but from his own first meetings with the Group, Huyser became convinced otherwise; not only did the number of army desertions seem to be grossly exaggerated by the media, both domestic and international, but the general believed the numbers would remain minimal through the shah’s departure. In this estimation, Huyser was quite correct. This pattern continued on January 19, when many expected a new explosion of violence amid the religious processions marking Arbaeen, the fortieth day after Ashura. Instead, after yet another negotiated compromise between security forces and moderate religious leaders, the potential flash-point day passed with relative calm. As a consequence, among those still hoping to forestall a Khomeini takeover, the faintest glimmer of optimism began to peek through the midwinter gloom.

This was reinforced by the defiant personality of Shapour Bakhtiar. From his small prime minister’s office on Pasteur Avenue, its portrait of the shahanshah conspicuously covered over, Bakhtiar declared he was prepared to “sink my hands up to the elbows in blood” to defend his beloved Iran. No matter how great the forces arrayed against him, he vowed, “this government will not be shaken and I will never leave the constitutional trench.” For those regime loyalists who had dwelled so long in a kind of defensive crouch, such boldness had a bracing effect. On the same day that the newly appointed justice minister and fifteen members of parliament heeded Khomeini’s call to resign, further eroding Bakhtiar’s claim to legitimacy, the new prime minister nevertheless spent five hours methodically outlining his future goals to his military commanders, a performance that, according to Huyser, seemed to win the Group’s confidence and greatly boost their morale.

Not all were impressed, of course, and remaining among the doubters was William Sullivan. By January 20, Khomeini was threatening to publicly name the members of his Islamic Revolutionary Council, in direct opposition to Bakhtiar’s own government, and in a meeting with Sullivan that day Bakhtiar vowed to arrest any such pretender to his authority. “I am not sure who would carry out this arrest order,” Sullivan reported to Washington, “but, if it were done, Bakhtiar would be literally overwhelmed by the mob and his government would cease to function at all.” In the ambassador’s final analysis, the new prime minister, while clearly very courageous, was “close to being quixotic” in his impracticality.

For his part, the vastly more optimistic Huyser soon had reason to question how much progress he was truly making. After his heated confrontation with the Group on January 10, he felt he’d been winning over the generals, both in boosting their spirits and in getting them to start planning for the post-shah world, when all seemed to evaporate on the morning of Sunday, January 21, with another banner headline in the Tehran Journal. Two days earlier, Ebrahim Yazdi had held another meeting with Warren Zimmermann at the inn outside Neauphle-le-Château and, having taken the measure of the American emissary, clearly decided it was time to strike. The Tehran Journal headline read, “Imam Khomeini Arrives Friday.”

As a result, when Dutch Huyser walked into the chief of staff’s office that afternoon, it must have felt like déjà vu. “The Group all argued that if Khomeini returned on Friday—five days away—it was all over; the moment he set foot on Iranian soil, that was the end of the shah’s regime, and the lives of all associated therewith. The armed forces would disintegrate.”

Once again, the American general let his Iranian colleagues vent their fears and frustrations, but perhaps it was a positive sign that one of them finally displayed a bit of problem-solving initiative: Why not kill Khomeini?

Well, why not indeed? This wasn’t the sort of thing the United States might undertake, Huyser explained, but if the Group thought it a good idea, “why didn’t they pay someone to do it themselves?” But as with the earlier talk of staging a coup, this question elicited only blank stares about the room, no response at all.

* * *

Dominating a small island in the middle of the Nile, the Aswan Oberoi hotel stands as a monument to the unfortunate design choices popular during its early 1970s construction: great walls and walkways of stressed concrete, a brutalist flat-topped high-rise suggesting an expensive water tower, all done in a dull yellowish-brown finish that might be described as Camel Dung Matte. It was in the penthouse suite of that high-rise that the shah and shahbanou first took up residence after their flight from Tehran.

In those first days, Farah Pahlavi kept herself busy with endless telephone calls: to friends and loyalists in Europe and the United States, to her four children staying with relatives and governesses in Texas. More frustrating were calls to Iran, where, whether due to technical glitches or the operators suspecting the identity of the caller, lines frequently went dead. Still, with persistence the queen was able most days to be patched through to General Ali Neshat, the commander of the Imperial Guard, for an update on the national mood. By contrast, the shah did very little at all. Outside his immediate retinue, he spoke to virtually no one, and the stream of telephone calls from his loyalist generals back in Iran seeking guidance went largely unanswered. He appeared to be fading more into the background by the day.

The plan, to the degree that any plan existed, was for the couple to rest in Egypt for a few days and then continue on to the United States and the Annenberg estate awaiting them in Palm Springs. Soon after arriving in Aswan, however, the queen began to reconsider. “I didn’t want to go to America,” she explained. “By that time, after all we had been through with the Carter administration, I simply didn’t trust them anymore.”

While undoubtedly this change of heart partly stemmed from resentment at what she saw as Carter’s shabby treatment of her husband, there was also an element of cold rationality to it. Already there were powerful groups within Iran plotting for the shah’s quick return, a move the Americans were strongly opposed to. Consequently, for the exiled couple to deliver themselves into American hands would all but preclude that scenario, would essentially make them hostages. This was Gary Sick’s estimation. “I always wondered why the shah didn’t go straight to the U.S., where they had prepared this landing site for him,” Sick reflected. “He didn’t do that. He never said it explicitly, but my guess is that if he went straight to the U.S., he was sort of declaring himself as our pawn, that as long as he stayed away from us, he still had options. I think he was hoping that something would happen in Iran that would pave the way for him to go back. Not that he was making any serious effort himself to bring it about. He was waiting for somebody else to take care of the problem.”

As a result, when another head-of-state friend in the region, Morocco’s King Hassan II, extended an invitation for the Pahlavis to visit, the shah swiftly accepted. On January 22, just six days after pitching up in Egypt, the shah and shahbanou together with their retinue reboarded the imperial 707 and made for the Moroccan city of Marrakesh. There followed another lavish welcome ceremony, overseen by King Hassan and his wife, Lalla, before the exiles were whisked off to a modern and well-guarded villa on the outskirts of the ancient city.

If puzzled by the shah’s move to Morocco, Carter and his senior advisors were privately rather pleased. Already extremist elements in the Iranian opposition were making sounds of demanding the shah’s extradition to Iran to stand trial once they took over. The specter of a future extradition battle joined to the growing anti-Western fervor within Iran was enough to give any Western government pause in offering the deposed monarch safe haven. Certainly, the Carter administration wasn’t about to rescind its invitation to the shah, but in light of the extremely volatile climate that continued to prevail in Tehran, the longer he tarried on his way to Palm Springs, the better.

It seems the Americans failed to sufficiently consider the downside of all this, however: that the longer the shah remained in the vicinity, the more his enemies became convinced that a 1953-style coup was in the planning, and the harder it was for Shapour Bakhtiar’s hatchling government to attain any shred of legitimacy. To the degree that the King of Kings grasped this, he clearly didn’t care. It was in Morocco that he began to shake off the depressive lethargy that had enveloped him in recent months—not to begin plotting his return, as his loyalists hoped and his enemies feared, but rather to fill his empty days by taking up golf.

* * *

On Friday, January 26, General Huyser awoke to two bits of news, one most welcome, the other unsettling.

At some point during the night, Ayatollah Khomeini in France had decided not to attempt a return to Iran that day after all. Even some of the ayatollah’s closest supporters had begun voicing concern that his early return might cast the nation into civil war, and it was an enormous relief to Huyser that at this eleventh hour the cleric had heeded calls for a delay. But only a delay. By the American general’s reckoning, Bakhtiar and the Iranian army needed at least a few more weeks’ respite to firmly take control of the country, but this was a time frame Khomeini and his cohorts seemed unlikely to grant. Still, any slowing of events was a boon.

The other item of news took the form of an article in Pravda, the official Soviet newspaper, reporting on Huyser’s mission in Iran. Over the previous three weeks, the Soviet media had steadily escalated its rhetoric against the American envoy, from initially describing him in dismissive terms to gradually elevating his status to that of grand puppet master. In that morning’s Pravda, Huyser’s status had risen once again; now he was effectively Iran’s new shah, the behind-the-curtain dictator to whom everyone in the existing regime, including Shapour Bakhtiar, answered. In tandem with the intensifying rhetoric had come a spike in personal threats against Huyser, such that he now wore only civilian clothes and was driven around Tehran in an unobtrusive Paykan sedan. The chants calling for the shah’s demise had understandably lost some of their luster following his departure, such that marching protesters now often retrofitted the old refrain to “Death to Huyser!” Although he tried to take it in stride, the general noted that “having hundreds of thousands of people chanting ‘death’ at you really did bring a conclusive feeling of being unwanted.”

Still, he struggled to carry the pro-Bakhtiar banner forward, to devise ways to overcome both the passivity of his Iranian military counterparts and the pessimism of so many of his countrymen, both at the embassy and in Washington. He got a bracing reminder of what he was up against when, in late January, he received a message from his commanding officer back in Germany, General Alexander Haig.

While asking after the status of Huyser’s mission, Haig intimated that he was hearing the Iranian army was on its last legs; here was clear indication that the defeatist tone being put out by Ambassador Sullivan and the State Department was dominating the official narrative. To counter this, Huyser sent an “eyes only” cable to Haig, detailing his progress on the two tracks he’d been asked to pursue: (a) the overt mission of consolidating Bakhtiar’s rule with military backing, and (b) the fallback option of staging an outright military coup. “The way I’m working the problem,” he wrote to Haig, “is essentially to do 2B [a military takeover] but under the direction of Bakhtiar. I have been encouraging him to take these steps. He has shown willingness to do so and that is the pace I would like to accelerate. If that fails, then my guidance to [the Group] is we must go to a straight military takeover.”

Except this outline overlooked one salient detail. Huyser was not, in fact, encouraging Bakhtiar to do anything; he still had never spoken to the man. Instead, he was talking with the senior Iranian generals, the Group, and assuming they were passing his counsel on to Bakhtiar. Incredibly, given the stakes involved, Dutch Huyser had no way of independently verifying this was truly the case, and as the record would eventually show, it wasn’t.

What’s more, by the time he wrote his secret note to Haig on January 23, Huyser had become aware of a potentially fatal weak link in his main line of communication. While he remained confident that enough Iranian military units would obey orders for a coup to succeed—the requisite number Huyser came up with was a mere twenty thousand good troops, strategically placed—he was increasingly skeptical that their commanders, the Group, might actually issue the order. His skepticism centered on one general in particular, but as bad luck would have it, he happened to be the most important one: the newly appointed army chief of staff, Abbas Gharabaghi. From their very first meeting, Huyser had been struck by Gharabaghi’s passivity, his obsession with protocol and perceived slights, and he’d seen little in the intervening weeks to suggest the chief of staff might rise to the occasion if strong action was required. It was far too late to do anything about this, however, and by late January all the American envoy could do was hope that matters weren’t put to such a test.

Improbably enough, although in keeping with the roller-coaster course of the past year, there came a few small signs that this hope just might be fulfilled. With the shah departed from the scene, a certain vitality had gone out of the opposition movement, and with Iran now in the depths of winter people were wearying of the protracted economic crisis and its deprivations. While the strikes in the oil fields and customs houses continued, a steadily growing number of civil servants were showing back up at work. On January 24, Bakhtiar gave another of his fiery, defiant speeches that, if leaving the hard-core opposition unmoved, clearly had a bolstering effect on both the military and that unknown mass of Iranians—perhaps even the “silent majority” of Richard Nixon’s famous phrasing—who yearned for a simple return to normalcy. The following day, the army put on a grand show of force—armored battalions paraded through Tehran’s streets while great squadrons of F-14s flew overhead—to punctuate a pro-government rally at which an estimated quarter of a million supporters turned out, a fraction of those who routinely marched in opposition, admittedly, but a much greater number than planners had expected. As Robert Huyser approvingly noted, Shapour Bakhtiar seemed to possess the same properties as tea—“the hotter the water, the more his strength came out”—and he was even able to instill a bit of backbone in General Gharabaghi at times. By January 27, and with Khomeini’s return at least temporarily postponed, Huyser was able to report back to Washington on “incremental progress day by day.”

But it was right about then that Bakhtiar might have overstepped. Ever since Khomeini’s vow to return, Iran’s military and civilian authorities had tussled over how or whether to prevent it, resulting in the periodic shutdown of Mehrabad Airport as Bakhtiar envoys begged French authorities to somehow keep the cleric bottled up in Neauphle-le-Château. This situation couldn’t continue indefinitely obviously, and on the evening of January 27, Bakhtiar made another of his signature brash moves. In a letter to Khomeini, he pleaded that the cleric delay his return for three more weeks. In exchange, Bakhtiar would fly to Paris to meet with him, and together they would forge a compromise.

Khomeini soon rejected the offer—he would meet only if Bakhtiar resigned the prime ministership first—but not before every newspaper in Iran had reported on Bakhtiar’s desperate appeal. He swiftly canceled his Paris plans, but the damage had been done: Hat in hand, the Iranian head of state had humbled himself before the ayatollah, only to be spurned and further humiliated. The line between victor and vanquished couldn’t have been clearer, and Bakhtiar soon conceded as much by acquiescing to Khomeini’s return. After some last-minute wrangling, that was slated to occur on February 1.

As that watershed event approached, it underscored a panoply of contradictions in the corridors of power in both Tehran and Washington. Despite his very recent humiliation at Khomeini’s hands, Bakhtiar remained unbowed, even scornful of his chief antagonist; as he told his advisors, his new strategy was to let Khomeini return so that he might “drown in mullahs”—that is, to trigger a falling-out among those oppositionists fearful of the theocracy that the ayatollah and his disciples were threatening to impose. Noting that Bakhtiar seemed more resolute in recent days than ever before, General Huyser pressed the Carter administration to at last fully embrace one of its two options—to either stand wholeheartedly behind the prime minister or give the go-ahead for a coup—arguing that either scenario was far preferable to a Khomeini takeover. By contrast, Ambassador Sullivan contended that the game was over, that the administration needed to make the best of a bad situation by coming to terms with Khomeini, and he proceeded to act on that conviction by secretly meeting with Khomeini’s chief lieutenants in Tehran. Advocating such diametrically opposite approaches, the two American envoys—ironically, still cohabiting the ambassador’s residency quite amiably—decided to present these options to the White House jointly and let them decide.

By then, however, Dutch Huyser had increasingly come to see the built-in fallacy of his own mission, that rather than the solution to Iran’s crisis, the Group—those senior generals he had spent so many hours and days debating and cajoling and reassuring—were actually the core problem, the quavering, directionless commanders of an army waiting to be led. As Huyser noted in his memoir, as the hour of Khomeini’s return drew near, “everything was building toward a terrifying climax.”

Chapter 17

The chartered Air France 747 emerged low out of Tehran’s gray wintry sky to touch down at Mehrabad Airport just after 9:15 a.m. on February 1. On board was Ayatollah Khomeini, along with a handful of his closest advisors, the plane’s flight crew, and some 120 foreign journalists. In an image carried live on Iranian national television, the plane taxied to a stop before the main terminal, and with some fifteen hundred well-wishers gathered on the tarmac below, a mobile staircase was wheeled into place. After several suspenseful minutes, with the open cabin door crowded with mullahs and young men in suits, the ayatollah in his black turban and flowing brown robes abruptly stepped into the Iranian daylight for the first time in fifteen years. He did not smile or wave; his face seemed to register no reaction at all. Instead, he shuffled forward on the landing and then allowed the man standing to his right, an Air France flight attendant, to take his elbow and guide him slowly down the stairs. Unbeknownst to the millions observing this scene on television screens, the seventy-eight-year-old cleric was not quite so frail as his hesitant gait suggested. Rather, for the potentially perilous return to Iran, Ebrahim Yazdi’s wife, Sorour, had bought bulletproof vests for the ayatollah and his principal advisors, including her husband, but so tightly did Khomeini’s vest fit beneath his robes he found it somewhat difficult to walk.

The 747’s arrival in Tehran on February 1 capped a chaotic scramble for the ayatollah’s retinue. Despite Prime Minister Bakhtiar’s at last acceding to Khomeini’s return, one airline after another had refused the journey, fearing the Iranian air force might yet choose to shoot the plane out of the sky. Air France had finally agreed to make a plane available, but only if the Neauphle-le-Château conspirators could pony up a cash deposit of 500,000 francs, or about $125,000. To this end, the international media proved of benefit to the oppositionists in a new way; along with publicizing the ayatollah’s return—and probably reducing the odds of the plane being shot down—the 5,000 francs demanded of each journalist vying for a seat largely paid for the charter.

As it was, the seven-hour flight from Charles de Gaulle Airport to Mehrabad was uneventful, with Khomeini, sitting in first class alongside his aide Sadegh Ghotbzadeh, keeping his distance from the clamoring journalists in steerage. At last, though, the intrepid Peter Jennings of ABC News wheedled his way forward to put a question to the ayatollah as the plane neared Tehran: “Would you be so kind as to tell us how you feel about being back in Iran?”

Giving Jennings a withering glance, Khomeini turned away to mutter a single word: hichi, “nothing.” The normally silver-tongued Ghotbzadeh appeared briefly flustered, then quickly offered: “He doesn’t make any comment.”

When reports of Khomeini’s “nothing” response later circulated, much of the foreign press interpreted it as a note of disdain, even contempt, for his homeland. The Iranian faithful interpreted it very differently. Here was yet another sign that their religious leader had so transcended normal earthly concerns that even returning to the home he had been denied for fifteen years was no longer of any importance, that his gaze was fixed firmly on the ethereal. It also fit neatly into the Shiite tenet regarding the Twelfth, or Hidden, Imam. Somewhat akin to the Christian belief in the Second Coming of Christ, in Shia Islam the ushering in of Paradise will be foretold by the earthly appearance of the last, or Hidden, Imam, and in recent months a growing number of Iran’s faithful had concluded Khomeini was that figure. As a result, many of the millions who turned out that morning to line the ayatollah’s procession route into Tehran were welcoming not merely their revolutionary and spiritual leader but a living god.

In preparing for Khomeini’s return, the Iranian army had established a security cordon around the airport and given permission for just fifteen hundred of his supporters to be on hand when he emerged from the plane. Almost all those who managed to secure the highly coveted permits were religious figures—marjas, mullahs, seminary students—so on the tarmac Khomeini was immediately engulfed by a sea of similarly clad clerics. It put at least some observers in mind of Bakhtiar’s vow to see the ayatollah “drown in mullahs.”

By prior arrangement, the army was to safeguard Khomeini’s route only as far as the Shahyad Monument, on Tehran’s western reaches. From there, the ayatollah’s own security forces would take over and provide protection as he continued on into the city and the site of his first public address. By the time Khomeini’s motorcade had reached Shahyad, however, so vast and frenzied was the crowd—by some estimates, up to half a million were squeezed into the monument intersection alone—that further progress seemed impossible; as one observer noted, “If you had thrown a needle in the air, it would not have touched the ground.”

And then what seemed impossible swiftly became perilous, with so many supporters surging forward in hopes of catching sight of the imam that all semblance of order was lost, the sheer number of those throwing themselves onto the hood and roof of Khomeini’s sedan raising fears that he might suffocate. Soldiers and crowd marshals at last managed to clear an area in the road just large enough for a military helicopter to land, but even when the ayatollah was hustled on board, the danger persisted; so many disciples clung to the helicopter’s landing skids that the craft could barely lift off, forcing the pilot to hover some ten or twelve feet off the ground and violently twist the controls until the last of the devotees lost his grip and fell back to earth.

Although only consecrated in the late 1960s, the Behesht-e-Zahra cemetery on Tehran’s southern outskirts had already become the capital city’s largest by 1979, the final resting place of tens of thousands of dead. Over the previous year of civil unrest, Behesht-e-Zahra had also become the preferred burial ground of those felled in battle with the shah’s security forces. By the time of Khomeini’s return, hundreds of these had been buried in Section 17, the tract reserved for martyrs, or shahids, but in anticipation of the battles still to come, scores more graves had been dug and were waiting to be filled. That Ayatollah Khomeini should choose Behesht-e-Zahra as the site for his first public address upon returning to Iran was a message clear to any who chose to see it.

A message that became even clearer when Khomeini took to the stage his followers had erected in the center of the graveyard. Sitting in a throne-like chair, for nearly an hour the cleric hurled invective at his various enemies, a group now expanded to include the government of Shapour Bakhtiar, “this feeble last gasp of the shah’s regime.” Despite a conciliatory note he had passed to President Carter just five days earlier, Khomeini now heaped scorn upon the nation that had stood beside the fallen shah, who, “in accordance with the mission he was given as the servant of foreign powers,” had transformed Iran into an impoverished and vice-ridden nation. Perhaps most chilling was the strangely worded warning he issued to the nation’s military officers. It was now their sacred duty, Khomeini thundered, to turn away from their foreign masters and hirelings like Bakhtiar. “Abandon him,” he commanded, “and don’t think that if you abandon him, that we will slaughter you all.”

If this was intended as warning, it was one unlikely to be noted by the denizens of the American embassy. Ambassador Sullivan had once suggested Khomeini might assume a “Gandhi-like role” in Iran’s future, but for the ayatollah’s all-important inaugural speech upon his return, no one at the American embassy thought to dispatch a Farsi-speaking staffer to the cemetery to hear it. Instead, as the embassy reported to Washington the following day, “we are still trying to get [a] clear reading of what Khomeini said in speech at Behesht-e-Zahra yesterday. Reports conflict, but tone seems to have been strongly anti-foreign, and anti-American. Two Iranian sources deny this, however.”

* * *

During the thirty-one days Robert Huyser spent in Tehran, there came a moment that crystallized the ultimate absurdity of his mission. It occurred on the evening of January 15, five days after he had moved into the ambassador’s residence, when, after dinner together, he and William Sullivan went to the embassy’s secure communications room to conduct their nightly teleconferences with Washington. Huyser had just completed his call to the Pentagon and was chatting with Sullivan when the teletype machine whirred to life, indicating the ambassador’s State Department session was about to commence. Both men absently glanced at the machine’s printout. “After an exchange of greetings,” Huyser recalled, “the first word from Washington was: ‘We hope you are in the secure room alone. This is for your eyes and not for the eyes of General Huyser.’ ” Huyser and Sullivan looked at each other, dumbfounded. “Well,” Sullivan finally said, “we’re either in this together or we’re not, and you’re invited to stay.” With a military man’s respect for chain of command, Huyser chose to leave the room, but ever afterward the episode underscored to him the colossal ineptitude of the administration’s handling of the Iranian crisis, an approach in which not only did the right hand not know what the left was doing, but steps were actively taken to ensure it stayed that way.

The general was undoubtedly reminded of the secure room incident when he was ushered into the Oval Office on the morning of February 5, 1979. He had flown out of Tehran two days earlier after his superiors, taking note of the ever-escalating threats made against him, decided it was too dangerous for him to remain. Following a brief stop at his home in Stuttgart—when Huyser had left for his “quick visit” to Iran a month earlier, he’d taken just two changes of clothes—he was immediately flown on to Washington. Earlier that morning, he had met with National Security Advisor Brzezinski, and then the two men strolled over to the Oval Office to meet with President Carter.

If Huyser expected a quick meet and greet with the president, he was soon set right. Instead, after excusing Brzezinski, Carter led the general over to the office’s couch-and-coffee-table arrangement, where, with the attention to detail for which he was famous—at times, infamous—he spent the next half an hour asking pointed questions about the current state of affairs in Iran.

As Huyser had been urging for weeks and repeated to the president that morning, it was vital that Shapour Bakhtiar immediately take decisive “positive action,” code for having the military take control. This need was even more pressing now that Khomeini was back in Iran, Huyser explained, as he had stressed to Iran’s senior commanders, the Group, in their last meeting. At this stage, Huyser could only hope Bakhtiar got the message and took it to heart.

Shifting the conversation slightly, Carter posed a startling question: “What do you think I should do about Ambassador Sullivan? Should I relieve him and bring him home?”

Huyser chose his words with care. Sacking the ambassador in the current climate would send a bad message, he counseled, but Sullivan needed to be given instructions.

“But he’s had the same instructions you had,” the president countered. “Why hasn’t he followed them?”

As Huyser later noted in his memoir, it was only at that moment that he realized “there was less than cordial feelings about Ambassador Sullivan” in the senior reaches of the administration; somehow, this very salient and very obvious detail had eluded his grasp for the past month. By eluding his grasp, it had also caused Huyser to accede to Sullivan’s demand that he not involve himself in political matters—specifically, that Huyser have no contact with Shapour Bakhtiar. Astonishingly, during the general’s entire tenure in Tehran, none of Sullivan’s detractors back in Washington, a group that included nearly everyone Huyser spoke with during his nightly teleconferences and—as he was now discovering—extended up to the president himself, seemed aware of this injunction or had moved to rectify it.

This, too, appeared to reflect an administration unmoored, one without discernible direction or leadership. To the contrary, this was a ship of state riven by competing factions to the point of near mutiny. In recent weeks, this had manifested itself in a shocking string of leaks to the press about the government’s Iran policy, with insider details of some of the president’s most highly restricted discussions often being reported by The New York Times or The Washington Post within the day. Naturally, these leaks merely deepened the divisions in the administration further. As the NSC’s Gary Sick recalled, “It got to the point where you just didn’t want to share information or ideas with anyone outside your immediate orbit, because ‘Is this going to show up in the Times or the Post tomorrow morning?’ ”

But there was something else as well. By the time of General Huyser’s audience with the president in early February, a new strain of thinking about American-Iranian relations was gaining strength in official Washington. It was at least partly rooted in that human tendency when confronted with calamity to search for a silver lining, but it also stemmed from the careful ministrations of Khomeini and his astute vizier, Ebrahim Yazdi.

However inconstantly, the administration had for months hoped to forestall Khomeini’s ascension in Iran, viewing it as a potential disaster for American standing in the region. But not the very worst disaster, a growing number of American officials consoled themselves as that ascension grew more likely. That, of course, would be a communist and Soviet-allied Iran, so perhaps a theocracy headed up by a virulent anticommunist wouldn’t be such a bad thing after all. Carter himself had given voice to this idea as early as at that pivotal January 3 Oval Office meeting when he opined that “a genuinely nonaligned Iran would not be a U.S. setback.” In a new top-secret analysis issued the day after Khomeini’s return to Iran, the National Security Agency now theorized that the ayatollah “might be far more moderate and Westernized than perceived.” When, on February 3, the Washington Post columnist Stephen Rosenfeld penned a scathing analysis of Khomeini’s appeal and background, highlighting some of his more vengeful and bloodthirsty writings over the years, among those rushing to the cleric’s defense was the State Department’s own Henry Precht. Rosenfeld’s conclusions were not only wrong and based on documents that appeared to be forgeries, Precht told a departmental audience, but highly irresponsible given Iran’s current delicate state of affairs. They also obscured growing signs, Precht maintained, that the ayatollah and his followers were turning toward moderation.

How delusional this wishful thinking was swiftly became clear. On the same day that Huyser met with President Carter in Washington, February 5, Khomeini held a press conference in Tehran. With Yazdi translating, the cleric announced to the gathered international media that in place of the illegitimate Shapour Bakhtiar he was now naming an interim government of his own, one to be headed by that longtime moderate dissident leader, Dr. Mehdi Bazargan. Taking to the stage to stand behind the robed and stone-faced Khomeini, the slight, slope-shouldered Bazargan looked all the world like some timid schoolboy cowering in the presence of a forbidding headmaster.

That press conference was the culmination of several interesting developments. For months, Khomeini and his closest advisors, including Yazdi, had insisted that in the transitional government they envisioned, a constituent assembly would be elected to formulate a new constitution that, if ratified by the people, would serve as the framework for future national elections. By early February, however, the talk of an elected constituent assembly was being set aside, with Khomeini abruptly announcing that he and a group of Islamic scholars had already prepared the constitution the people would vote on.

Casual listeners might have also missed the significance of something the ayatollah had said at the Behesht-e-Zahra cemetery on February 1. Announcing that he intended to personally choose a government “by virtue of the acceptance the people have granted me,” Khomeini went on to say that this government would be “based on divine ordinance, and to oppose it is to deny God as well as the will of the people.” The full meaning of this became apparent at the February 5 press conference only when Khomeini claimed to have assumed the velayat-e-faqih, or guardianship of the jurists, an archaic tenet of the Shia faith that no other cleric had invoked, let alone claimed to possess, in living memory. In essence, velayat-e-faqih held that in the absence of the corporeal presence of Islam’s imams, the task of interpreting and implementing God’s law on earth fell to the imam’s living clerical representatives, and more specifically to the jurists, or faqih, of the faith. Khomeini had explicitly, if a bit repetitively, spelled this out in a 1969 sermon included in a collection of his teachings titled Islamic Government: “Since the rule of Islam is the rule of law, only the jurists, and no one else, should be in charge of the government. They are the ones who can undertake what the Prophet intended. They are the ones who can govern as God ordered. The contemporary jurist is the heir to the Prophet’s authority. Whatever was entrusted to the Prophet has been entrusted by the Imams to the jurists. The jurists have authority on all matters.”

By natural extension, this also meant that all non-jurist forms of government were inherently illegitimate. Remarkably, throughout the buildup to the revolution, Khomeini had somehow managed to keep this novel concept largely to himself; certainly, it was unknown to his three viziers in Neauphle-le-Château, who disclaimed Khomeini’s writings on the matter as SAVAK forgeries when first asked about them. It was only on February 5, when Khomeini revealed he was the possessor of the divinely bestowed velayat-e-faqih, that its full import became evident. “I hereby pronounce Bazargan as the ruler,” he announced, “and since I have appointed him, he must be obeyed.” Not obeyed as Khomeini the man, mind, but because he was Khomeini the trustee of God’s government, and, lest anyone need reminding, “revolt against God’s government is a revolt against God. Revolt against God is blasphemy.”

In the years ahead, many Iranians were to cite that February 5 press conference as the moment when they saw precisely where the revolution was headed. Interestingly, one of Khomeini’s three viziers, Abolhassan Bani-Sadr, would claim to have experienced this epiphany a few days earlier, as he watched the ayatollah descend the Air France staircase to be engulfed by the sea of clerics on the Mehrabad tarmac. As Bani-Sadr would later write from his own exile, “It seemed that the duty of the intellectuals was to bring Khomeini to Tehran and hand him over to the mullahs.”

* * *

The day after Khomeini’s return, Shapour Bakhtiar had delivered another of his supremely self-confident speeches, sneering at those who had predicted the event would cause the Iranian army to immediately implode. Much to the contrary, Bakhtiar averred, “for fifty years, never has the army been so obedient to a prime minister.”

While lacking his aplomb, in his meeting with President Carter on February 5, General Huyser agreed that Bakhtiar’s deft handling of the ayatollah’s return had placed him in a far stronger position than previously.

Both these pronouncements would very soon prove in error as the Iranian Revolution began to tumble toward its bloody finale.

On the evening of Friday, February 9, the end of the Iranian weekend, the national television network ran a special news program on Ayatollah Khomeini’s return to Iran eight days earlier. In the months and years ahead, many would wonder whatever possessed Shapour Bakhtiar to accede to its airing.

Some believe the new prime minister hoped to project confidence in his standing by means of a magnanimous gesture to his foe. Khomeini had just named a government to compete with Bakhtiar’s own, yet Bakhtiar remained in control of the ministries and the army. That very afternoon, a pro-government rally in Tehran had drawn a large crowd. While it might seem counterintuitive to choose this extremely fragile moment to extend an olive branch to one’s archnemesis, Shapour Bakhtiar was a counterintuitive man.

Another theory holds that the broadcast was part of Bakhtiar’s effort to cause Khomeini to “drown in mullahs”—that is, to show the Iranian masses that the returned ayatollah wasn’t the benevolent and embracing cleric they’d been led to expect, but rather an unsmiling and vengeful puritan surrounded by unthinking minions. To this end, televising Khomeini’s infamous response when asked what he felt upon returning to his homeland—hichi, “nothing”—was sure to give some supporters pause.

The most likely explanation, though, is also the simplest: that amid the tumult of those days of early February, neither Shapour Bakhtiar nor anyone in a position of authority at the National Iranian Radio and Television syndicate had either the time or the means to pay close attention to what was going out on the airwaves. But at least one group did pay close attention: a collection of air force technicians, known as homafars, billeted at the sprawling Doshan Tappeh air force base in eastern Tehran. Their response to that night’s broadcast was to provide the final spark to the revolution’s denouement.

Within the vast military-industrial complex the shah had erected in Iran over the course of his reign, the homafars represented a particular vulnerability in the command structure. Heavily recruited from the poorer and rural classes, they tended to be bright young men who received specialized training, often at air bases in the United States, in the repair and maintenance of the kingdom’s military air fleet in return for signing seven-year work contracts. While technically civilians, they wore uniforms and lived on air force bases, where they were subjected to the same restrictions as air force personnel, but without any of the privilege or prestige that came with belonging to the most pampered branch of the shah’s military. Adding to their dissatisfaction, amid the oil boom of the mid-1970s their long-term labor contracts meant they were stuck in jobs paying a fraction of what they might earn in the booming private technology sector. In essence, the imperial air force had maneuvered itself into a position where some of the world’s most advanced aircraft and weapons systems were being tended to by a body of deeply disaffected workers—and then the revolution began.

Through the autumn of 1978, homafars had displayed their unhappiness by staging work stoppages and pro-opposition rallies at military air bases around the country. As the new year got under way, problems were so glaring they drew the notice of the normally obtuse American embassy. In anticipating a “breakdown in discipline and integrity” within the Iranian military apparatus upon Khomeini’s return, Ambassador Sullivan informed Washington on January 22 that “the elements most likely to rebel would be educated young men, such as air force homofars [sic], who control most sophisticated equipment, such as F-14 aircraft and Phoenix missiles.”

Just as it is not known who authorized the Khomeini newscast of February 9, so the precise turn of events that occurred in the Doshan Tappeh mess hall that evening remains unclear. By most accounts, at some point during the broadcast, a group of homafars started chanting their support of Khomeini while denouncing the shah and Bakhtiar. A group of loyalist air force officers countered with taunts and insults, which degenerated into fistfights. Before long, these scuffles had escalated into a general melee, with both sides scrambling for weapons. By 10:00 p.m., Doshan Tappeh was reverberating with the sporadic pop of gunfire, and the base commander radioed for a unit of the Imperial Guards, the kingdom’s most elite soldiers, to intervene. Over the next several hours, the guards steadily closed on the rebellious homafars, who barricaded themselves in the air base training center, until the shooting slackened and finally died away. In a phone conversation with a concerned colleague around 1:00 a.m., the base commander announced that the fracas was over: “They have all gone to sleep.”

But not everyone. The working-class neighborhoods that surrounded Doshan Tappeh were Khomeini strongholds, and there the gunfire had fueled rumors that the homafars were being massacred. All night, crowds of would-be rescuers massed at the base’s gates demanding to be let in. Shortly before dawn, their numbers now swelled to the thousands, they simply forced their way through. As they fanned out through the vast complex, one band broke into the base armory to grab its weapons, and now the Imperial Guards who had been laying siege to the barricaded homafars were the besieged themselves.

And then, quite abruptly, the fight was no longer isolated to Doshan Tappeh. By daylight of November 10, the assault rifles looted from the air base armory were turning up all across Tehran, joined to other weapons that had been secreted in revolutionary stockpiles in recent weeks. These guns were employed in street battles between the rebels and the security forces, and in overrunning isolated army and police outposts where more guns were seized. By midmorning, any semblance of order was collapsing across much of the capital, entire neighborhoods descending into open insurrection.

True to form, Shapour Bakhtiar responded with bravado, as if refusing to believe how quickly all authority was slipping from his hands. To the quavering senior generals on his National Security Council, he insisted that “now is the time to attack,” and ordered a dusk-to-dawn curfew be imposed, starting at 4:30 that afternoon. He also presented them with an ambitious to-do list: the names of some two hundred insurrectionist leaders, including Khomeini, to be arrested at once.

Matters didn’t go as he hoped. Since his return, Khomeini and his lieutenants had converted two adjacent schools in downtown Tehran—the Alavi School for Boys and the Refah School for Girls—as their principal headquarters. From his heavily guarded quarters at Alavi, the ayatollah commanded his followers to defy the curfew decree. He also issued an ominous warning: “Although I have not given the order for sacred jihad [holy war], and I still wish matters to be settled peacefully…I cannot tolerate these barbarous actions.” Unless the army quickly stood down, he said, “I will take my final decision, placing my trust in God.”

Bakhtiar’s curfew was roundly ignored. The dragnet for those on his two hundred most-wanted list fared no better. While a military armored unit did manage to get within a few hundred yards of Khomeini’s headquarters, it soon withdrew in the face of fierce resistance. And still the rebellion spread. By that evening, most of Tehran’s streets were under the control of the revolutionaries, many now armed, with one police and army detachment after another pinned down in their quarters. Far from Bakhtiar’s estimation that “now is the time to attack,” by nightfall security units across the capital were trying only to defend themselves.

Shuttered within the embassy or in the relative safety of their homes, those Americans still living and working in Tehran had only the most fragmentary sense of what was happening. Even the specialists in the embassy’s communications room couldn’t draw a cogent picture, reporting to Washington that they were constantly being buffeted “by half facts and rumors.” Their perspective was further limited by a protracted battle raging just a few blocks down from the embassy between the army and revolutionary gunmen trying to push north. “Stray rounds from the fighting fell into our compound all afternoon and evening,” Ambassador Sullivan remembered. “As darkness came, I watched some of the action from the rooftop of my residence but the increasing number of spent bullets ricocheting off the walls of the house made it an unsafe vantage point.”

Four hundred miles northwest of Tehran, the city of Tabriz remained relatively quiet on February 10—curiously so, considering how often it had served as a revolutionary flash point. Still, news of what was occurring in Tehran soon reached the provincial city, enough to cause the local army commander to pay a courtesy visit to Michael Metrinko, the American consul, that afternoon. As Metrinko recalled, “over a very proper cup of tea,” the commander casually suggested it might be time for the consul to start carrying his embassy-issued revolver. Metrinko didn’t thrill to the prospect, as he noted in his diary that evening. “My knowledge of weapons in general and my revolver in particular doesn’t extend to knowing how to use them or it, so I demurred,” he wrote. “One of these days I guess I’ll have to shoot the damn thing if only to see where the bullets come out, but I’d rather take my chances with just running. Hopefully it won’t come to that, since running was never my best sport.”

Metrinko would soon have reason to wish it had been.

* * *

If it was difficult for American officials in Tehran to determine what was taking place, it was certainly no clearer for those looking on from Washington. In normal times, embassy officers filed reports with their respective supervisors, who then condensed the material before sending it on through established channels to the White House and governmental departments. On February 10, this system had so broken down that the embassy communications team was simply sending on whatever snippets or rumors came in over the transom.

“It meant a lot of information was coming in, but it was very fragmentary,” the NSC officer Gary Sick remembered. “You couldn’t assemble it into any sort of coherent picture—except that none of it looked like good news from our standpoint.”

In fact, administration officials were getting much of their information from the same source as American civilians: television news. By now, most major American newspapers and all three networks had reporting teams in the Iranian capital, and unlike the resident CIA and embassy officers these teams were actually out in the streets observing matters firsthand. This intrepidness led to the first fatality in the foreign journalist community when the Los Angeles Times reporter Joe Alex Morris, observing the storming of Doshan Tappeh on the morning of February 10, was struck in the heart by a random bullet.

In light of the deteriorating situation, late on the afternoon of February 10, National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski called for an emergency meeting of the Special Coordination Committee to convene at 8:30 the next morning. In the meantime, though, conditions in Iran, eight and a half hours ahead of Washington, continued to worsen for the Bakhtiar government. Overnight, an armored relief column dispatched from the provinces found its path blocked by rebels on Tehran’s outskirts; after its commander was killed and several tanks set ablaze, the rest of the column turned back to base. For those army and police units still holding out in various corners of the capital, it became increasingly clear they were on their own, that no relief was coming. Then, just before dawn on February 11, another mob broke into a light-arms factory adjacent to Doshan Tappeh; in short order, thousands more rifles and machine guns were being handed out in the streets. By daylight, and with a cold rain falling, Tehran was wreathed in a fog of gunpowder and smoke, the heavy air rent by the crackle of gunfire.

While many sensed the end was near, not so Shapour Bakhtiar. More resolute than ever, he took up a machine gun of his own and vowed to emulate another head of state, Chile’s Salvador Allende, who had died, gun in hand, in a coup six years earlier. He also directed his army chief of staff, Abbas Gharabaghi, to come to his office at nine that morning to plot strategy.

When that time came and went with no sign of the general, Bakhtiar initially attributed it to the growing difficulty in moving about the city. He began suspecting something different when his repeated telephone calls to Gharabaghi’s office went unanswered.

* * *

In fact, Abbas Gharabaghi was still at his office in the Supreme Commander’s Staff headquarters that morning, but there was a good reason why he wasn’t taking Bakhtiar’s calls: Since shortly before dawn, he and his aides had been contacting every senior military commander who remained in the Tehran region to urge them to make for the SCS building in Lavizan and a meeting of “great national importance.” That meeting convened at 10:30 a.m., in the same wood-paneled conference room where General Huyser had held so many strategy sessions with the Group, and it represented one of the largest gatherings of military leaders in modern Iranian history: fully twenty-seven senior officers representing every branch and specialized bureau of the armed services. So great was the turnout that there weren’t enough chairs to go around—four or five officers remained standing throughout—and, testament to the closeted system the shah had created, many were meeting each other for the first time.

Discussions got under way in an atmosphere of considerable wariness. In recent days, a number of those in attendance had entered into quiet negotiations with the opposition, either singly or in small groups. This included General Gharabaghi himself, who had discreetly met with Khomeini’s designated prime minister, Mehdi Bazargan. At the same time, the hard-liners in the room were still actively planning for a military takeover. It was now time to decide, Gharabaghi announced, which of the three options left to the army should be taken: to stage a coup in defense of the regime; to surrender to the rebels; or to merely declare its neutrality and withdraw from the contest.

As if on cue, Gharabaghi’s deputy, a general named Hushang Hatam, took to the floor. As he pointed out, all those present had taken an oath of allegiance to the existing constitution as junior officers, and loyalty to the throne was an inviolate precept of that oath: In essence, the King of Kings was the constitution. But with the shah now departed from Iran, most likely never to return, and Bakhtiar openly talking of jettisoning the monarchy and converting the nation into a republic, it meant the constitution itself was null and void, which also meant those present were now released from their oath of allegiance. In sum, Hatam asked, just what would the army be upholding if it staged a coup?

As they grappled with this somewhat convoluted logic, many in the room were surely stunned when a second attendee stepped forward in its support: General Hossein Fardoust. One of the shah’s closest friends going back to their childhoods, the sixty-two-year-old Fardoust had served as deputy chief of SAVAK for a decade, before going on to head a shadowy organization known as the Imperial Inspectorate, the spy agency that spied on the spies. That position made him the keeper of the palace’s most sensitive secrets and afforded him a level of access to the shahanshah that few could match. While not a standing member of Robert Huyser’s “Group of Five,” Hossein Fardoust was so senior and so closely attuned to imperial wishes that he had occasionally sat in on their meetings with the American general. That said, the taciturn Fardoust so rarely spoke up during those sessions—perhaps befitting his image as the shah’s eyes and ears—that Huyser came away without much of an impression of the man.

But Hossein Fardoust most certainly spoke up at SCS headquarters on February 11, lending his full-throated support to Hatam’s position. Under the weight of this argument being promoted by one of the shah’s oldest friends, as well as a recognition of their steadily diminishing prospects—throughout that morning’s meeting, reports came in telling of another garrison surrendered, another police station stormed—the idea of attempting a coup was soon abandoned. The only options left to the generals, then, were to either surrender to the revolutionaries or declare their neutrality and order their soldiers back to barracks. Since the very word “surrender” was anathema to most of those present, it was decided to issue a proclamation of neutrality. Seeing to that task, Generals Fardoust and Gharabaghi huddled to come up with the proclamation’s wording, and then each of the twenty-seven officers present stepped forward to sign his name to the document.

At 1:15 that afternoon, the national radio and television networks broke away from their programming to carry a special announcement from the High Council of the Army. Averring that “the mandate of the Iranian army is to defend the independence and integrity of our beloved country,” the council had “unanimously resolved to declare its neutrality in the current political dispute. Orders have been issued to all military units to return to their bases. The Iranian army has always been supportive of the noble and patriotic people of Iran, and supports with all force the wishes of the noble nation.”

Shortly after that announcement, and with military units throughout Tehran starting their withdrawal to barracks, Shapour Bakhtiar apparently had second thoughts about emulating Salvador Allende. After a light lunch at his office desk, and with errant bullets slapping into the side of the building immediately opposite, he finally acceded to the wishes of his aides and made for the escape helicopter waiting on the grounds below. In his memoir, he would recount his fruitless efforts to reach General Gharabaghi on the telephone that morning with a touch of black humor, suggesting that each time he called SCS headquarters, he received the recording “We’re sorry, but there is no army at the number you are calling.”

As for the twenty-seven officers who had gathered in the SCS conference room in Lavizan, most either returned to their own command posts to oversee the army stand-down or went home to join their families. After all, they reasoned, having declared their neutrality and averted a bloodbath, it wasn’t as if they had anything to worry about from the revolutionaries.

* * *

The emergency session of the Special Coordination Committee to deal with the Iranian crisis convened in the White House Situation Room on the morning of Sunday, February 11. At least two features of the meeting seemed to typify the Carter administration’s response to the crisis from the outset.

Time and again over the past year, America’s most senior foreign policy makers had been indisposed or preoccupied with other matters at the very instant that events in Iran hit a crucial juncture. This pattern repeated on February 11. President Carter and Secretary of State Vance were spending that weekend at the Camp David presidential retreat to strategize over the Middle East peace process, while Secretary of Defense Brown was traveling abroad. As a result, other than National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski and General David Jones, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, those gathered in the Situation Room were an assortment of lower-level governmental officials: undersecretaries and deputy assistant secretaries.

The meeting typified something else as well. By the time it convened at 8:30 a.m. Eastern Standard Time, it was already 5:00 p.m. in Iran and too late for the Americans to in any way affect the outcome there: The generals had long since declared their neutrality, army units were returning to barracks and Shapour Bakhtiar had gone into hiding.

“I’d say the mood was very somber,” recalled Gary Sick, who was to spend much of that day in the Situation Room. “Ever since Khomeini came back, I think we’d all been preparing for the possibility that things would fall apart, but the speed with which it did came as a shock.”

A shock that at least one member of the coordination committee appeared loath to accept. Even at this late hour, Zbigniew Brzezinski clung to the hope that the Iranian generals might yet seize power, that there was still time for Huyser’s Option C to be implemented. Since the person best positioned to gauge this was probably Ambassador Sullivan, Brzezinski, following protocol, had the senior-ranking State Department official in the room, Undersecretary David Newsom, put a call through to Sullivan in the embassy’s communications room.

By the time of Newsom’s call, the harried ambassador had a new emergency on his hands. The headquarters for the U.S. Military Assistance Advisory Group in Iran was located in the same Iranian army compound, Lavizan, that housed the Supreme Commander’s Staff headquarters and General Gharabaghi’s office. Quite unaware of the fateful meeting being held in the SCS conference room, the MAAG commander, Major General Philip Gast, had gone into his Lavizan office that morning, along with twenty-five of his subordinates. In the early afternoon, with armed revolutionaries massing outside the base gates, Gast had radioed Sullivan to say that he and his team were preparing to leave and make for the safety of the embassy, three miles away. Soon after, however, this plan proved unfeasible, the sheer size and firepower of the rebel forces outside Lavizan making escape impossible. Instead, and in response to the increasing number of bullets flying about, Gast and the MAAG team were taking refuge with those senior Iranian officers who remained on base in an underground bunker until a more viable alternative presented itself. By the time of Undersecretary Newsom’s call to the embassy—about 5:30 in Tehran and turning dark—Sullivan was urgently trying to find some way to extricate the MAAG team from Lavizan, and he wasn’t much in the mood to entertain Brzezinski’s pie-in-the-sky query about a military coup. “When he asked for my assessment,” Sullivan recounted, “I gave it to him in a few short phrases, emphasizing my current preoccupation with trying to get my twenty-six military personnel out of the bunker.”

But fifteen minutes later, Newsom called back. A matter of especially poor timing, for Sullivan had just then succeeded in getting hold of the embassy’s principal contact within the Khomeini camp, Ebrahim Yazdi, and was in the process of enlisting his help in rescuing the MAAG team. “Not particularly amused to have to answer esoteric questions” at such a crucial moment, Sullivan chose to reply with a blunt instruction. “Tell Brzezinski to go fuck himself!” he shouted into the phone.

The mild-mannered Newsom was apparently startled to hear an American diplomat use such language. “That’s not particularly helpful,” he admonished.

“What, you want me to translate it into Polish?!” Sullivan slammed the receiver down.

Simultaneous to the Sullivan-Newsom discussions, General Huyser was contacted at his office in Stuttgart, West Germany. Joining him on the line from the Situation Room were Brzezinski, General Jones and a deputy secretary of defense.

Just six days earlier, Huyser had given President Carter and his senior cabinet members a decidedly upbeat assessment of Bakhtiar’s odds of withstanding the Khomeini onslaught or, barring that, the feasibility of the Iranian generals moving to Option C. But on February 11, Huyser could read the news coming over the teletype as well as anyone. In view of the insurrection taking place in Tehran, he told his listeners, it now seemed highly unlikely that a military coup would succeed without massive outside support. When asked if he would be willing to return to Iran to lead that outside support, Huyser replied that he would, but only if certain conditions were met. “There would need to be unlimited funds,” he recounted telling his listeners. “I would need to handpick ten to twelve US generals; I would have to have about 10,000 of the best US troops, because at this point I had no idea how many Iranian troops I could count on; and finally, I must have undivided national support.”

In Huyser’s recollection, once he finished his list, there followed a long silence on the line—a kind of answer in itself. After a few more general questions, the call was terminated.

In its aftermath, Brzezinski sought the assessment of one last individual: General Philip Gast. Despite still being pinned down in the Lavizan bunker, the MAAG commander calmly gamed out the odds for a successful coup. He figured them to be 5 percent.

“At that point, even Brzezinski realized it was finished,” Gary Sick recalled. “He didn’t want to admit that, but he had no choice, it was over. And it was probably a very painful thing for him, because he had really been pushing very hard to keep our lines with the military open, to convince them that they should stand up to the revolution. He had been counting on that.”

In Sick’s memory, the Situation Room grew steadily quieter as the gravity of the moment sank in. “Nobody broke into tears,” he said, “but I think everyone understood that we were now faced with a whole new set of problems. And after a while everyone just one by one began getting up, packing up their things and walking out. And that was it. That was the end of it.”

One detail that would stay fixed in Sick’s mind was the summary line of one of the last cables out of the embassy: “Army surrenders; Khomeini wins. Destroying all classified.”

Chapter 18

At one point during his stay in Neauphle-le-Château, Ayatollah Khomeini was asked if, upon assuming power in Iran, he intended to exact vengeance on the shah’s loyalists. The question offended him. “I have fought to put an end to the regime that tortures, terrorizes, spills the blood of opponents,” he frostily replied. “Do you think I would take over only to put on the same boots?” In February 1979, the Iranian nation began finding the answer to this rhetorical question: yes.

Sensing doom closing in, on the morning of February 11 the SAVAK guards keeping watch over Amir Abbas Hoveyda at his north Tehran safe-house prison prepared to flee. They urged their captive of the past three months to do likewise, even leaving a pistol and a car in the driveway for the former prime minister to take. But Hoveyda stayed, instead calling his niece, Dr. Fereshte Razavi, for help in arranging his surrender to the new regime. Enlisting the aid of a friendly mullah and accompanied by several revolutionary militiamen, Razavi set out across the battlescape of north Tehran for her uncle’s prison, only to discover a large and vengeful crowd already gathered in the street outside. “They didn’t know who was inside,” Razavi recalled, “only that it was a SAVAK facility, and they were ready to kill whoever was there.”

With the mullah accompanying Razavi insisting he was on a special mission for Khomeini, the rescuers managed to talk their way past the mob and pass through the metal gates of the compound. They found Hoveyda, alone, calmly awaiting their arrival on the villa veranda.

As early as the summer of 1978, friends and relatives of Hoveyda’s had urged he flee Iran. Those calls had intensified through the autumn as it became increasingly evident the shah was searching for scapegoats on whom to blame his government’s shortcomings—and who better than his prime minister of twelve and a half years? Still, Hoveyda refused to run, insisting he had done nothing wrong and, thus, had nothing to fear. He maintained this stance even after the shah’s goons came to arrest him in early November. Over the subsequent three months, the number of those offering to facilitate Hoveyda’s escape multiplied—if the shah is to be believed, this group included himself—but the Persian Sphinx stayed in the safe-house prison with his papers and books. He was still there when the revolution broke over Tehran on February 11.

By the time Hoveyda and his rescue party were ready to leave the SAVAK house, the crowd outside had grown larger and angrier. Fearing for Hoveyda’s safety, the mullah arranged for an ambulance to be brought into the compound, then instructed Hoveyda to get in back and lie on the floor “lest the mob recognize his familiar face and engage in some violent act.” But the Persian Sphinx refused. Instead, recounted Hoveyda’s biographer Abbas Milani, he hunched low next to his niece in the ambulance bay, “making himself invisible to the angry, intrusive eyes of the mob who at every stop pressed their faces up against the backdoor glass, searching for clues to the passengers’ identities.”

Hoveyda was eventually taken to Khomeini’s headquarters at the Alavi-Refah school complex. With the ayatollah and his lieutenants operating out of Alavi, Refah was fast becoming a sort of VIP prison, the holding pen for an ever-expanding roster of the revolution’s most prominent enemies, now being grabbed up all across the city. Like Hoveyda, some of those brought in had been taken directly from their previous, imperial jailers.

These included General Nematollah Nassiri, the infamous former SAVAK chief and a loyal shah henchman going all the way back to the 1953 coup. Notoriously corrupt, Nassiri had been arrested in November in the same show-trial dragnet as Hoveyda, but dispatched to the far less agreeable climes of Qasr Prison. That is where the mobs had found him on the afternoon of February 11 when, in the style of the storming of the Bastille in revolutionary France, they burst through the Qasr gates to free its many thousands of inmates. Recognized by the enraged crowd, Nassiri had been stabbed in the throat and nearly beaten to death before being wrested away by komiteh members. Brought to Refah along with several other imprisoned officials of the old regime, the former SAVAK chief, his head and throat covered in bloody bandages, was paraded through the halls of the girls’ school before a cheering, taunting throng.

Well into the night, more and more luminaries of the shah’s government were brought in, including many of the twenty-seven senior officers who had gathered at SCS headquarters just that morning. Thinking themselves safe for having ordered their troops to stand down, their guard further lowered by Khomeini’s proclamation that righteous soldiers would be “embraced in a brotherly fashion,” most had been caught completely defenseless, alone or with their families, when the revolutionaries came for them.

For months, opposition strategists like Ebrahim Yazdi had fretted over what Iran’s generals might do when it appeared the imperial state was about to fall. This fretting had intensified in recent weeks as that outcome grew ever more likely. Those fears could now be put aside: In February 1979, there occurred in Iran one of the swiftest and most thorough decapitations of a nation’s military leadership in modern history.

* * *

Into the early morning hours of February 12, Ambassador Sullivan and senior American embassy staffers worked the telephones in the communications room in hopes of rescuing the twenty-six MAAG officers trapped in the bunker at Lavizan. Notwithstanding Zbigniew Brzezinski’s earlier interruption, Ebrahim Yazdi was enlisted to spearhead this effort, but it spoke to the utter chaos now reigning in Tehran that even this most senior Khomeini lieutenant had little sway over the vigilante squads roaming its streets with their Kalashnikovs, eager to administer whatever version of “revolutionary justice” they deemed appropriate. Consequently, it was nearly 2:00 a.m. before the doctor was able to reach Lavizan, where, together with a senior Shiite cleric and under the putative protection of a revolutionary guard unit, he escorted the American officers in a small convoy of commandeered cars on the three-mile journey back to the embassy. Even then, so frequently was the convoy stopped by street fighting or ad hoc militia checkpoints that it wasn’t until almost 5:00 a.m. that it cleared the embassy gate and the exhausted officers reached safety. As an enormously appreciative William Sullivan relayed to Washington soon after, “We have found the moderate pro-Khomeini forces, such as Ibrahim [sic] Yazdi, to be very helpful and protective of Americans and the American embassy.”

But as the veteran of ambassadorships in two extremely tense Asian nations—Laos in the mid-1960s and the Philippines in the early 1970s—Sullivan sensed the challenges facing the remaining American community in Iran were hardly at an end. To the contrary, with Tehran now awash in weapons and the disparate revolutionary factions vying for primacy, conditions were likely to turn a good deal more dangerous in the days ahead. Despite his own exhaustion and lack of sleep over the previous several days, the ambassador convened an emergency meeting of his senior staff later that same morning.

With the capital considerably quieter on February 12, the last outposts of the old regime steadily capitulating, Sullivan wanted to take advantage of the lull to inaugurate a new airlift of those American citizens who remained in Iran, estimated to be about seven thousand; thankfully, the vast majority were in Tehran, greatly alleviating potential logistical hurdles. At the same time, all three of the regional consulates, those in Tabriz, Shiraz and Isfahan, were reporting continuing violence and score settling as those secondary cities played catch-up to events in the capital. There was also deepening concern over the safety of the CIA and air force teams at their two listening post installations near the Soviet border. The outposts had previously been protected by Iranian soldiers, but those units had now melted away.

But to William Sullivan’s mind, probably the greatest potential peril was faced by those who remained at the embassy itself. On Christmas Eve, several hundred anti-American protesters had attempted to storm the compound and been repelled only by the determined defense of the American Marine guard detachment and an assisting force of Iranian soldiers who had liberally bathed the attackers in tear gas. Now, with the Iranian army essentially nonexistent, the only armed personnel who could be fully relied upon to defend the sprawling compound were the twenty-two U.S. Marine guards. At that February 12 meeting, Sullivan commanded his subordinates to ramp up the airlift operation and placed the Marine guards on high alert. In anticipation of a possible hostile takeover of the embassy, he also instructed his staff, as well as members of the CIA station, to have their most sensitive documents bundled and ready to be destroyed, either burned or fed through the embassy’s shredders, on two hours’ notice.

Sullivan’s concerns proved extremely prescient. At 10:30 on the morning of February 14, Valentine’s Day, the grounds of the embassy were suddenly raked by machine-gun fire from several surrounding buildings. While staffers scrambled for cover, an estimated seventy-five gunmen began clambering over the compound walls in what was clearly a highly coordinated attack. With the ambassador’s residence and outlying structures being peppered with bullets, Sullivan and his staff made for the main embassy building, or chancery, and the secure communications “vault” on its second floor. There, the ambassador and his senior aides once again desperately sought to make contact with their chief ally in the new regime, Ebrahim Yazdi. It looked to be a very close-run thing, for, having thoroughly shot up the unoccupied ambassador’s residence, the gunmen soon turned their attention to the chancery.

“The high-powered G-3 rifles that were in the hands of these people proved capable of penetrating the metal doors we had installed for security protection on all entrances to the building,” Sullivan wrote. “Defense of the ground floor appeared improbable, and I instructed the Marines to lay a barrier of tear gas near all entrances, to withdraw up the stairwell to the second floor and to join the rest of the personnel in the communications vault…. We could hear the metal doors on the ground floor being battered down.”

By great good luck, a Yazdi-dispatched rescue party reached the chancery at the very moment that their more high-spirited revolutionary colleagues succeeded in kicking through its metal doors. Consequently, when Sullivan finally commanded his staff and Marine guards to set down their weapons and “surrender,” it was to a mixed contingent of both rescuers and attackers. After a tense and very confused standoff, the two factions of gunmen so intermingled as to make allegiance quite impossible to determine, the Americans were ushered downstairs and out to the lawn. There, to their enormous relief, they came upon the ubiquitous Ebrahim Yazdi, once again appealing for calm, once again struggling to take control.

With a battery-powered megaphone, the doctor climbed atop a parked car and ordered all Iranians to leave the compound at once. In this instance, Yazdi’s authority was augmented by the clouds of tear gas lingering in the air, so that within a few minutes most of the gunmen, as well as those curious bystanders who had wandered in from the street, dispersed. Against all odds, only three people, two of the attackers and one Iranian staff member at the embassy, had been killed in the assault.

In the aftermath, Yazdi joined Sullivan on a tour of the shattered ambassador’s residence—it appeared every window had been shot out, every piece of furniture overturned—and the two discussed what security arrangements could be made to ensure the legation’s future safety. It was while they stood on the terrace of the shattered residence that Yazdi asked if he might address the embassy’s shaken staff. “He made a rather eloquent little statement assuring us that the attack had been carried out by undisciplined elements of the revolution,” Sullivan recalled, “that the government was deeply apologetic for what had happened, and that we would be afforded full protection in the future.”

Joined by a retired Iranian army colonel, the ambassador and the doctor then fashioned plans for a force of some forty Iranian sentries to complement the Marine guards in protecting the embassy going forward. Yazdi also insisted on assigning a smaller group of gunmen to serve as Sullivan’s personal bodyguards. As the ambassador would subsequently learn, these guards were actually members of a militant student “hit squad” who had originally been sent to kill him. Acceding to Yazdi’s demand, they were now sworn to defend Sullivan, but as the ambassador acerbically noted in his memoir, “it was not the most comforting sort of arrangement.”

That said, it was a good deal more comforting than the situation in which one of Sullivan’s consular officers, Michael Metrinko, was about to find himself.

* * *

As in many of Iran’s other provincial cities, the final flames of revolution ignited later in Tabriz than in Tehran and burned for longer. Whereas the capital began to calm by February 13, it was on that day that a large crowd of Tabrizis gathered before the American consulate to demand the diplomatic emblem hanging over the main gate be destroyed, and then made intimations that the same fate should befall the American consul. To Metrinko’s relief, more sympathetic elements of the new regime arrived to place the compound under “religious seal” and posted a proclamation noting this protection at the front entrance. As Metrinko wrote in his diary that evening, “Frustrated looters and loiterers have been coming up to the main gate ever since, reading the proclamation and wandering away, presumably to return some other day.”

It was also on February 13 that in emulation of a revolutionary tradition being observed in most every other Iranian city, a mob stormed the central prison in downtown Tabriz to free its inmates. One of Metrinko’s more exotic job duties in recent months had been to periodically check in on a group of eight Western inmates, including four Americans, being held at the prison on charges of smuggling cars. Concerned for the prisoners’ safety in the wake of the jail’s “liberation,” he was just about to set off in search of them when a car pulled in to the consulate compound; out stepped four of the former inmates, two Americans and two West Germans, still in their prison uniforms. Bluffing his way with the self-appointed militiamen milling about, Metrinko announced he was placing all four men under his diplomatic protection.

That evening saw such a massive upsurge in the fighting outside the compound walls—Metrinko counted off the gunshots at close to one every second—that he and his new charges were forced to sleep in the consulate cellar. The following day was even worse, with “revolutionary guardians”—essentially college students with machine guns—periodically showing up to offer protection, only to grow fearful for their own safety and leave again. On a more positive note, the other four Western former inmates were dropped off at the consulate, and by nightfall the gunfire had sufficiently slackened for the group to leave the cellar for the slightly more comfortable sleeping quarters of an upstairs office floor.

The good times didn’t last. At midmorning on February 16, four or five gunmen climbed over the compound wall and proceeded to spray the consulate with machine-gun fire. Bursting into the inner sanctum office where Metrinko and the others had taken refuge, they set to ransacking the place and smashing whatever Americana gave offense, a list that proved considerable. Of more pressing concern to Metrinko, they threw a loop of rope around his neck and looked for a suitable place from which to hang him.

But as was becoming something of a pattern with imperiled American diplomats that February, a second group of gunmen stormed into the compound at just that moment. Whether due to greater firepower or more impressive revolutionary credentials, this second group prevented Metrinko’s lynching and decreed the foreigners were to be taken to rebel headquarters, the Youth Palace auditorium in downtown Tabriz, for questioning.

But if they’d escaped the consulate lynch mob, the outlook for the Westerners appeared only marginally better at the Youth Palace. Placed into a room with two badly beaten Iranian men, supposedly SAVAK officers, the nine foreigners were taken out one by one and subjected to lengthy interrogations before being made to sign “confessions.” It was a terrifying ordeal. As Metrinko noted in his diary, “There was general pandemonium outside as the revolutionary militia continued to bring in ‘captives,’ and the large crowds gathered near the front of the Youth Palace surged around each newly-arriving vehicle. In the building itself the corridors were packed with jostling groups bellowing out orders and questions, and curious ‘militia’ (often very young boys carrying the omnipresent automatics) would constantly open the door and wander into our makeshift cell. The sound of shooting was continuous.”

It wasn’t until late that night that Metrinko and his charges were finally released from the Youth Palace, but with no place seeming safe in the lawless city, the group simply returned to the consulate. There they were swiftly made prisoners again. Their captors this time were a band of former air force officers who, perhaps to prove their bona fides in the eyes of their new rebel comrades, treated the foreigners with unbridled brutality. Throughout that night and until late the next afternoon, the new guards “went out of their way to degrade us as much as possible. Forced to sit at gunpoint, we were subject to constant cursing and threats.” While Metrinko didn’t let on that he spoke Farsi—the “sure sign” of a CIA officer in the eyes of the revolutionaries—this added an extra layer of terror as he overheard the guards “discuss the various possibilities of subjecting us to a ‘people’s trial,’ or the alternative suggestion that we simply be shot and that they claim we had started a fight to get their guns.”

But then, at very long last, potential salvation when yet another self-appointed rebel commander, this time a senior air force officer, arrived on the scene. Once Metrinko was able to take the man aside and explain their plight, the officer announced he was taking charge and berated his colleagues for their ill-treatment of the foreigners. He also told the Westerners something that by this point they had a hard time believing: They were now safe.

True to the officer’s word, the following morning a bus arrived to take the nine men to the Tabriz airfield, where they were put aboard an air force transport plane and flown to the capital. By early evening, the physically and emotionally shattered group had reached the relative safety of the American embassy compound, their harrowing ordeal finally at an end.

For all nine, their arrival in Tehran must have been profoundly disorienting. In contrast to their own tribulations of recent days, the capital city was now eerily placid, the last pockets of resistance having long since surrendered. Indeed, by the time they came off the plane at Mehrabad Airport on February 18, a great number of nations, including the United States, had already extended full diplomatic recognition to the new Islamic Republic of Iran.

That flight also underscored a curious parallel in the life of Michael Metrinko. As the consular officer in Tabriz, he had been eyewitness to the first great explosion of the Iranian Revolution, the riots that had devastated much of that city and so shaken the state back in February 1978. Almost exactly a year later, he had been eyewitness—and victim—to one of the last paroxysms of violence as that state collapsed and the revolution triumphed.

If this represented something of a completed journey for Metrinko, for another revolution eyewitness, Dr. Ebrahim Yazdi, a rather different one had just begun.

* * *

Under the glare of television lights and the popping of camera flashbulbs, on the afternoon of February 12 a rather forlorn-looking group of men had been brought one by one into a classroom of the Refah School for Girls and made to sit at its low-standing tables. They included some of the leading figures of the fallen regime, now wards of the revolution: generals, colonels, government ministers. Some, like General Nematollah Nassiri, were bloodied and bandaged, while others were so pale it was as if they were already dead. Some assumed a posture of obsequiousness and apology, others an air of quiet defiance. In this latter category, the most prominent was the former prime minister Amir Abbas Hoveyda. Even as the television cameras rolled and his interrogator set to taunt him, the Persian Sphinx stared steadily back, his mouth fixed in a tight smile, one simultaneously bitter and bemused. Getting little satisfaction from his attempts at humiliation, Hoveyda’s tormentor, Ebrahim Yazdi, finally moved on to more compliant prisoners.

In the progression of the Iranian Revolution, it would be hard to find a more paradoxical figure than the pharmacologist from Houston, Texas. It had been Yazdi who, at a flyspeck border crossing in the Arabian desert, persuaded Ayatollah Khomeini to forgo Syria and make for France. Once there, Yazdi had served as the cleric’s interpreter through a hundred interviews, carefully softening his incendiary statements to a witless foreign press. It was Yazdi who initiated a secret link to American government officials and who virtually single-handedly allayed American fears of what an Iranian Islamic republic might look like. And it was Yazdi, along with just a very small coterie of Khomeini lieutenants, who had masterfully stage-managed the crucial last days of Shapour Bakhtiar, who had meticulously sapped and then eliminated the ability of the generals to fight back. And now here he was in the moment of final triumph in a classroom of the Refah School for Girls, haranguing before the television cameras the same collection of thieves and brutes who had once held the nation in their thrall.

Yet this was a moment that would very soon turn on the doctor, that was to become an episode of enduring regret.

Shortly after that televised classroom spectacle, Khomeini appointed Yazdi to the revolutionary tribunal that would stand in judgment of their defeated enemies. By his own account and that of others, Yazdi had repeatedly tried to persuade Khomeini to refrain from arbitrary score settling, arguing that it would be far better for the new Islamic republic’s image to try the malefactors of the fallen regime in proper courts. With his appointment to the tribunal, it’s possible that Yazdi even briefly thought Khomeini had taken his advice to heart. If so, he was soon disabused.

The acolyte Khomeini chose to head his tribunal was the pudgy cleric with Coke-bottle glasses and a high-pitched giggle who had turned up in France, Sadegh Khalkhali, soon to become better known as the Hanging Judge. Dismissing the objections of Yazdi and other moderates involved in the trial process, Khalkhali announced the principals of the ancien régime would be tried as “enemies of God” and “corrupters of the earth.” Perhaps fitting for such vague charges, no evidence would be presented, no testimony taken and no appeals heard. With such a streamlined legal process in place, by February 15 Khalkhali was already able to present Khomeini with a list of the first group of “corrupters” he wished to execute. By 8:30 that evening, twenty-four men were blindfolded and taken up to the Refah rooftop to be shot.

Horrified, Yazdi hurried over to the Alavi school and pleaded with the ayatollah to either commute the death sentences or at least delay them until proper trials were held. Khomeini called Khalkhali down from the roof and for the next two hours listened as his two very different acolytes argued their cases. Not for the first time and certainly not for the last, the cleric came up with a strategic compromise, directing that twenty of the executions be postponed but that four be carried out immediately. With that, Khalkhali hurried back to the roof and stood the Khomeini-approved condemned men against a wall, whereupon a cleric—possibly Sadegh Khalkhali himself—fired point-blank pistol shots into their necks. As the four men fell and writhed in their death throes, revolutionary soldiers then stepped forward with assault rifles to riddle them with bullets. Finally, several attendees trained flashlights on the gory scene as a photographer captured the images that would appear on the front pages of Iranian newspapers in the morning.

The four executed that night would shortly be joined by many more as the new Iranian regime consolidated its rule. Ironically, considering he was one of the revolutionary leaders who most persistently tried to bring those killings to an end, Ebrahim Yazdi would forever be tainted by his own brief inquisitor role in that Refah classroom, lumped together with the murderous Khalkhali in the narratives of many chroniclers.

The extraordinary breadth of those ensnared in the revolutionary dragnet would also add to suspicions that the old order had been betrayed from within. How else to explain how one of the region’s most enduring regimes and one of the world’s strongest armies had so quickly and completely crumbled before the ragtag forces of revolution?

A prime focus of these suspicions would fall on two men. One was the army chief of staff, General Abbas Gharabaghi, the same fainthearted officer whom Robert Huyser had found so unimpressive during his meetings with the Group. It was common knowledge that Gharabaghi had conferred with opposition leaders in the days just before February 11, and of course it was he who had called the commanders’ meeting at SCS headquarters that culminated in the military’s declaration of neutrality. While almost every other officer present that morning ended up either in a prison cell or before a revolutionary firing squad, Gharabaghi was allowed to go off to a gilded exile in France.

But there might have been an even more strategically placed traitor in the army’s ranks: the shah’s childhood friend General Hossein Fardoust. According to several officers who attended the meeting at SCS headquarters on February 11 and lived to tell of it, Fardoust had been among those senior generals who most forcefully argued for the army to withdraw its support of Bakhtiar. As with Gharabaghi, perhaps the most incriminating evidence suggesting treachery on Fardoust’s part was what occurred in the revolution’s aftermath. Even as almost all mid- and senior-level officers of SAVAK were being put to death, Fardoust, its former deputy chief, was chosen to head up SAVAMA, the reconstituted secret police now doing the revolution’s bidding.

His luck didn’t hold. After several years of heading up SAVAMA, Fardoust was arrested and charged with being a Soviet spy. In April 1987, the national television network ran a lengthy prison interview with him in which he excoriated the King of Kings for his dissolute lifestyle and subservience to Western powers. He went on to make the fanciful claim that during his days with SAVAK he had employed ten thousand full-time investigators just to keep tabs on the corruption within the shah’s inner circle. “There was no way of keeping track of the lesser crooks,” he insisted.

If that interview represented Hossein Fardoust’s confession of past misdeeds, his timing was impeccable: Just weeks after its airing, he was found dead in his prison cell. Although no autopsy was performed, the regime announced the seventy-year-old had died of “old age and other natural causes.”

Chapter 19

What are you guys going to advise me to do if they overrun our embassy and take our people hostage?

—President Carter on dangers of allowing the shah into the United States, October 19, 1979

In the immediate aftermath of the Iranian Revolution, many of Jimmy Carter’s domestic critics took to describing the overthrow of the shah as the worst American foreign policy fiasco of a generation. In this view they were quite mistaken, for just nine months later the United States and Iran would tumble into a confrontation of such disastrous magnitude that both nations, as well as the rest of the world, are still dealing with its repercussions nearly half a century later.

In lurching its way into this second Iranian fiasco, the Carter administration was to replicate many of the errors that had typified its behavior in the first: ignorance, inattentiveness, wishful thinking. But it would also differ in one very significant way: Virtually alone among those in the American leadership, Jimmy Carter foresaw the approaching cataclysm but, through a nearly freakish convergence of circumstances, proved unable to prevent it.

* * *

Shortly before midnight on March 14, 1979, Amir Abbas Hoveyda was pulled from his cell in Qasr Prison and, flanked by excited young men with machine guns, led down a long corridor to a conference room. He seemed quite disoriented when first brought into the room, peering past the bright glare of the television lights as if searching for a familiar face or someone to explain what was happening; a biographer would liken his demeanor to that of a hunted animal. Pushed into a chair to face a row of clerics behind a long table, the former prime minister seemed only then to understand he sat before the regime’s new revolutionary tribunal.

Reminiscent of the humiliations inflicted on the victims of Mao’s Cultural Revolution, en route to the conference room someone had slung a cardboard placard bearing Hoveyda’s name around his neck. Ever the decorous statesman, Hoveyda asked his judges for permission to remove the placard, pointing out that all Iranians already knew who he was. The head of the tribunal, the fifty-two-year-old ayatollah Sadegh Khalkhali, granted this wish.

The seventeen charges leveled against Hoveyda were an eclectic lot, everything from “spreading corruption on earth” and “fighting God” to drug smuggling and espionage and “destroying forests.” The baffled defendant asked how much time he would have to prepare before trial, only to learn his trial was already under way. To Hoveyda’s protestations that he be shown the evidence against him, Khalkhali breezily explained that “most of the charges against you are general in nature, and need no proof or evidence.”

The farce continued until about 3:00 a.m. on March 15, at which point Khalkhali, apparently tiring of his toying with the Persian Sphinx, announced a verdict had been reached: guilty on all seventeen counts. The sentence: death. Granted an unspecified amount of time to prepare a final appeal, Hoveyda was led back to his prison cell.

It had been a month since the triumph of the revolution, although precisely who were its victors remained an open question. Almost instantaneously, the broad coalition of leftists, centrists and religious fundamentalists who had battled the shah and then Shapour Bakhtiar broke apart. On the same day the American embassy was overrun by gunmen, February 14, leftist fedayeen guerrillas went to war against religious mujaheddin, sparking four days of sporadic gun battles in Tehran’s streets. While Khomeini’s chosen interim prime minister, Mehdi Bazargan, was officially in charge, his authority was constantly undermined by thousands of mullah-led komitehs, by Khomeini’s handpicked Islamic Revolutionary Council and by Khomeini himself. But even the imam couldn’t command obedience. Days after the takeover, Khomeini had issued an edict demanding the citizenry hand back in the enormous stockpiles of weapons looted from military and police armories, a command that garnered the feeblest response.

One figure trying to navigate these shoals was Ebrahim Yazdi. In late February, Bazargan had appointed Yazdi the deputy prime minister for revolutionary affairs, but the doctor from Texas soon traded that out for the portfolio of foreign minister. In many respects, this seemed a logical extension, a carryover of the role he had assumed back in France as the revolution’s point man with the foreign community, but it now placed Yazdi in the thankless position of trying to justify the revolution’s excesses to that same community, even as he worked behind the scenes to curb them. Matters reached a new inflection point with the death sentence given to Hoveyda on March 15. As foreign minister, Yazdi was made to stand before television cameras to defend the sentence while being deluged with appeals from around the world demanding it be rescinded. Away from the limelight, he sought to convince Khomeini and his hard-line entourage that such farcical proceedings were doing great harm to the nation’s image. On this score, it appears his appeals and those of other moderates had an effect; shortly after Hoveyda’s sentencing, Khomeini agreed to a temporary moratorium on executions until new judicial guidelines were set in place.

This news was warmly received by a great many people, but perhaps by none more so than senior officials of the Carter administration.

With remarkable speed, that government had performed a dramatic about-face on revolutionary Iran. Carter started the process by extending recognition to the new regime within days of the February 11 insurrection while expressing his “continued hope for very productive and peaceful cooperation.” Matters had merely accelerated since. While American liberals and human rights activists had long regarded the Iranian revolutionaries as vastly preferable to the despotic shah—the American ambassador to the UN, Andrew Young, had recently gone so far as to predict Khomeini “will be somewhat of a saint when we get over the panic”—their victory was soon gaining the grudging acceptance of such unlikely figures as National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski. While still wishing the Iranian generals had shown some backbone by staging a coup, Brzezinski took solace in recognizing that Khomeini was even more stridently anticommunist than the shah, alleviating his fear that the Soviets might make strategic inroads in Iran. Also not lost on the national security advisor or his colleagues at the Pentagon was the fact that, while currently in a state of chaos, the Iranian army remained one of the largest in the world, reason enough to try to mend fences.

There were also enormous economic factors to consider. The strike-induced collapse of Iran’s oil industry in late 1978 had triggered a new international energy crisis that by early 1979 threatened to match the hardships and costs inflicted by the 1973–74 Arab oil embargo. By the end of February, oil prices in the United States had already increased by 50 percent, while panic buying again spurred gasoline shortages and interminable lines at gas stations all across the country. Getting Iran stabilized and its oil industry back on track might finally burst the panic-buying bubble, thereby reducing inflation and the threat of a deeper recession. Added to this were the benefits to be derived from beginning to restore the commercial links that had made prerevolutionary Iran one of America’s largest trading partners.

At least with the Bazargan-Yazdi wing of the new regime in Tehran, the initial signs of a rapprochement were promising. Shortly after Bakhtiar’s ousting, the two American intelligence listening posts on Iran’s northern border had been seized by leftist militants, the CIA and air force officers posted there taken prisoner. Intermediaries of Bazargan’s quietly secured their release and, in short order, their exit from the country. Even more auspicious was Ambassador Sullivan’s first substantive post-revolution conference with Bazargan. Throughout their long meeting, the interim prime minister stressed that he wished to maintain good relations with the United States. This even extended to continuing military ties between the two nations, albeit in greatly reduced form; rather than the six hundred MAAG advisors who had once served in Iran, Bazargan contemplated that perhaps twenty-five or thirty could be kept on in critical sectors.

In late February came the most welcome bit of news of all when Ruhollah Khomeini announced he was quitting Tehran for his old home in the holy city of Qom. While it was obviously possible to read too much into that decision, it suggested that even as he remained the spiritual guide of the nation, the seventy-eight-year-old cleric intended to leave the day-to-day functioning of its government to others. For those American officials alarmed at the prospect of a theocratic dictatorship taking hold in Iran, Khomeini’s decamping for Qom suggested their fears might have been misplaced, that moderates like Bazargan and Yazdi were ascendant.

Yet for that small handful of American officials remaining in Tehran, conditions didn’t look quite so rosy. After the February 14 assault on the embassy, Sullivan had ordered all nonessential diplomatic personnel to join in the general evacuation that saw some sixty-five hundred Americans leave Iran over the following week. By the end of that period, the United States’ once-vast official presence in the country was reduced to something on the order of eighty individuals, including twenty Marine guards and thirty MAAG officers, with almost all sequestered in the embassy compound on Takht-e-Jamshid Avenue. Increasing their sense of isolation were the circumstances in which they now lived and worked. In the aftermath of the embassy attack, four different groups of militiamen were assigned to “guard” its occupants, including several factions opposed to the Americans being there at all. As Sullivan archly noted in a cable to Washington in mid-February, their protectors included at least one group “trained to assassinate us.” When not taunting the resident Americans directly, the militiamen were pilfering the embassy commissary or making off with the more select of the hundreds of cars that evacuating Americans had left in the compound for safekeeping. The atmosphere was periodically enlivened by gun battles as one band of guards fell out with another, the sky above lit up with tracer bullets. And this was only the scene within the embassy compound; the few American officials who traveled beyond its walls encountered a land in the thrall of self-appointed militias and teenagers with machine guns, a patchwork quilt of fiefdoms under the rule of rival komitehs. As Prime Minister Mehdi Bazargan himself would come to complain, “The dispersion of power is still so diffuse that you often don’t know who’s directing traffic.”

One of the few Americans to venture out was the former consul in Tabriz, Michael Metrinko. In light of the psychic and physical hardships the American embassy staff had endured in recent months, crowned by the February 14 assault, the Carter administration had decided to replace nearly the entire diplomatic legation with new personnel. Despite his own harrowing experience in Tabriz, Metrinko wasn’t included in this recall. Instead, in recognition of his keen understanding of the Iranian “street” and fluency in Farsi, he was one of half a dozen veterans asked to stay on and was reassigned to the political affairs office. His excursions around Iran gave him a markedly different outlook from those officials back in Washington taking the long view.

“Khomeini was in charge, but he was in charge of sort of a political kindergarten where everybody had scissors,” he recalled. “There were constant demonstrations everywhere. There were constant kangaroo courts. Various ayatollahs were going around the country having people hanged. There were firing squads. There was trouble in the Kurdish area. There was a lot of trouble down in the oil fields.”

Metrinko’s take on matters only darkened when he made an extended tour of his old consular district in northwestern Iran in mid-March. Already, he noted in a series of reports back to Washington, former revolutionaries were falling away from the cause as they sensed despotism taking hold, dismissed the talk of coming democracy as a joke. With the economy cratering, one wealthy friend in Tabriz was quietly selling off his landholdings as he laid plans to flee the country with his family. Certainly no one bought into the notion of Khomeini quietly fading from the scene in his Qom madrasa. The most generous assessment from family members of another friend in Tabriz held that the cleric was “a doddering old fool,” while the majority opinion considered him “a dangerous fanatic.” The women of the family in particular were alarmed by Khomeini’s medievalist pronouncements when it came to gender roles. “We just got rid of one dictator,” they told Metrinko. “We don’t want another one.”

As Metrinko later commented, “I can’t recall meeting anyone on that trip who was happy with how things were going. Just very deep dissatisfaction—and unease—wherever I went.”

At the end of March, a national referendum was held in which the Iranian people were asked a single simple question: Do you wish Iran to become an Islamic republic? Despite the growing disenchantment Metrinko had detected, the outcome was never in doubt, even if the 98.2 percent yes vote seemed a bit improbable.

With that result, certain features of the new Iran came into sharper focus. That was exemplified by a speech Khomeini gave on April 1, lauding the nation for its choice. “Praise be to God that all sections of the Iranian people throughout the country cast their vote, with enthusiasm and eagerness, with love and dedication, in favor of an Islamic republic and nothing else.” But the ayatollah had never much gone in for the sunny, congratulatory homily, and his speech soon veered into the truculent. Clearly rankled by foreign criticism of the regime’s human rights record and kangaroo courts, he now questioned the need for trials at all. “There is no reason why a criminal should be tried in the first place,” he thundered. “Trying a criminal is something contrary to human rights. Human rights dictate that we should have killed the executioners right from the first day, because they were criminals and it was clear they were criminals…. All one need do with criminals is to establish their identity and once this has been established, they should be killed straight away.” Once one waded through this circular logic, its meaning was clear: Functionaries of the ancien régime like Amir Abbas Hoveyda were doomed. Soon after Khomeini’s April 1 speech, Sadegh Khalkhali hurried to his mentor’s home in Qom to be told firsthand that the execution moratorium so recently imposed was now lifted.

That lifting spurred a new round of foreign appeals and domestic backroom lobbying to save Hoveyda’s life. As for the former prime minister, he had few illusions of where matters were headed. In March, he had given his visiting niece, Fereshte Razavi, a note written on a tiny slip of paper that she smuggled out of Qasr Prison. “They hate us and think we destroyed all that was dear to them,” Hoveyda wrote in French of his captors. “They will kill us all.”

Back from his consultation with Khomeini in Qom, on the afternoon of April 7, Sadegh Khalkhali sped for Qasr. Once there, he had Hoveyda brought to another room in the prison’s administrative wing, to be paraded before television cameras anew. Fearing appeasers like Ebrahim Yazdi might yet succeed in interfering with his plans, “the hanging judge” had all the telephones in the nearby offices unplugged and took the added precaution of hiding them in a refrigerator. Alternately billed as a continuation of Hoveyda’s first trial or a hearing of his final appeal, the proceedings settled into Khalkhali delivering an extended monologue on the defendant’s various crimes. In one poignant moment, according to Hoveyda’s biographer, Abbas Milani, the former prime minister felt a twinge of hope when Khalkhali turned in his direction and smiled. “Your smile, sir,” Hoveyda said, “brings some comfort to my heart.” A fleeting comfort; moments later, Khalkhali announced Hoveyda’s death sentence was upheld.

It’s possible that at some point during the proceedings Khalkhali learned an American diplomat was on his way to meet with Ebrahim Yazdi in a last bid to save Hoveyda’s life. If so, it might explain why he dispensed with the delay a trip to the Qasr execution yard would entail. Instead, while directing all those in the conference room to remain seated, Khalkhali joined the small group of officials and guards who took Hoveyda from the room and started with him down the corridor. After a few steps, a cleric trailing just behind Hoveyda pulled a .38 revolver from beneath his robes and, from point-blank range, shot him twice in the neck. Collapsing to the concrete floor and writhing in pain, the Persian Sphinx managed to utter a few last words—“it wasn’t supposed to end like this”—before the executioner fired a third bullet into his brain.

* * *

On April 9, 1979, President Carter took a call from his national security advisor, Zbigniew Brzezinski. The main purpose of Brzezinski’s call was to revisit a topic the two men had discussed several times before: the prospects for allowing the exiled shah and shahbanou to settle in the United States. Earlier that day, Carter had met with David Rockefeller, the chairman of Chase Manhattan Bank, where this same matter had been a chief topic of conversation. On the previous day, April 8, the president received a call from the former secretary of state Henry Kissinger: same again. As Carter noted in his official presidential diary that night, “Rockefeller, Kissinger and Brzezinski seem to be adopting this as a joint project.”

A joint project, but born of different motives. The shah had deposited hundreds of millions of dollars into Chase Manhattan during his reign, funds to which he still held the purse strings; the chairman of that bank had every incentive to do the bidding of one of his most prized clients, which included helping settle that client in the land of his choice. Henry Kissinger was the chief architect of the 1972 compact that made the shahanshah America’s policeman in the Persian Gulf. That compact had backfired spectacularly, directly contributing to the shah’s downfall, and Kissinger, a famously vain and venal man, certainly didn’t want one of his more prominent victims to speak out and sully the reputation he still enjoyed in some circles as a kind of foreign policy guru. As for Brzezinski, it largely came down to national honor and the projection of strength. The United States didn’t abandon its friends when the tides turned against them, he counseled, so providing the fallen Iranian king safe haven was the decent thing to do. Conversely, failure to do so sent the message the United States was fickle and weak, that it could be cowed by the threats of a dusty rabble in a far-off land.

It was this last line of argument that most stung Carter, for the continuing unhappy situation with the shah was both a personal and a political embarrassment. Surely adding to his sense of shame that afternoon, just two days earlier Iran’s new revolutionary regime had put Amir Abbas Hoveyda to death. In his ongoing effort to achieve some kind of rapprochement with that regime, Jimmy Carter, that self-styled champion of human rights, was once again being forced to mute his criticisms of its grotesque excesses, excesses against which those of the deposed and now-wandering shah paled. It was all enough to put the president in an irritable mood. “What would you do if you were president?” he snapped at Brzezinski.

If rhetorical, the question was a very valid one. Back in January, Carter’s people had prepared a comfortable asylum for the shah in California, only to have him twice postpone at the last minute, first for a brief stay in Egypt and then for a much longer one in Morocco. Those delays had stoked suspicions in revolutionary Tehran that the exile was lingering in the region in hopes of a countercoup that would restore him to the throne. That, in turn, had helped fuel Tehran’s increasingly strident demands that the shah be returned to Iran to stand trial, as well as rage at the United States, his “obvious” partner in the alleged countercoup plans.

“It was the shah’s dithering that created this situation,” said Gary Sick. “If he’d come on to the United States when originally planned, I don’t think there would’ve been any problem at all. But from our perspective, the longer he waited, the more untenable his presence became.”

Through February and March, various American envoys were dispatched to counsel the shah against coming, first with diplomatic delicacy—the timing wasn’t “propitious,” he was told at one point—but then with growing firmness.

Quite aside from how this impasse had arisen, the president now had to grapple with two considerations that ensured it was likely to continue for some time.

Obviously, any American hope of reknitting relations with Iran depended on forging ties with the moderate political faction in Tehran, with men like Mehdi Bazargan and Ebrahim Yazdi, but given the anti-American fervor still gripping Iran, any such outreach had to be so low-key as to be practically invisible. Just as in the last days of the old regime, being perceived as having Washington’s approval was the kiss of death for any political figure in post-revolution Iran, so any overt American overture was almost certain to produce the opposite of the intended effect. The killing of Amir Abbas Hoveyda was a sad case in point. Naturally, the Carter administration had no choice but to add its voice to the chorus of Western governments urging his life be spared, but given Iran’s current climate, that chorus probably helped ensure his execution. The extraordinarily delicate task before the administration, then, was to try to bolster the moderates in Tehran in any way possible, but to take pains to leave very few footprints in doing so. Letting the shah into the United States would be to simply throw a bomb into the mix.

But Carter had to contend with an even more fundamental issue. Along with calls for the shah’s extradition, Ayatollah Khomeini had increasingly taken to inveighing against the evil designs of the United States, with almost all of Iran’s ills—unemployment, prostitution, even regional droughts—directly attributable to the diabolical schemes of “the great Satan.” In this environment, might providing a refuge for the shah endanger those American diplomats remaining in Iran? This question was anything but rhetorical, considering that the American embassy had already been violently attacked twice, first on Christmas Eve and then seized outright on February 14. Since that last attack, Washington had periodically queried its diplomats in Tehran about repercussions they might face if the shah were allowed into the United States, and each time those diplomats had vigorously pleaded he be kept away.

As to the reason for the sudden flurry of new appeals by the shah’s American friends in early April, this was easy enough to track. A couple of weeks earlier, the Moroccan king had let it be known that with an increasingly restive conservative clergy of his own it was coming time for his Iranian guests to find other arrangements. With no more suitable welcome mat set before them—reportedly only Paraguay and apartheid South Africa had extended invitations—on March 30 the shah and shahbanou had deplaned at Nassau Airport in the Bahamas, en route to a five-room bungalow on a dreary sandspit atoll given the magnificently inappropriate name of Paradise Island. Placed under virtual house arrest by local authorities, and in quarters so cramped that most of their belongings had to be stacked under a waterproof tarp in the yard, Farah Pahlavi was to describe their residence in the Bahamas as “among the darkest times of my life.” In the meantime, her husband once again leaned on his well-placed American friends, especially Kissinger and Rockefeller, for help in finally reaching the American shore, now a mere sixty miles away. Once again, the State Department queried the Tehran embassy about the effect such a development might have. Once again, the embassy urged the shah be kept out, that to do otherwise was to flirt with disaster.

This hardly seemed alarmist, considering that conditions in Iran were going from bad to worse. In March, elements of the ever-restive Kurdish minority of western Iran had agitated for greater autonomy, and the brutally repressive response of the new regime fanned wholesale rebellion. By the following month, the Kurdish revolt was being joined by smaller insurrections by other ethnic and tribal minorities around the country, calling into question whether one of the world’s most durable nations might fracture into its component parts. With the Iranian economy in tatters and an estimated 35 percent unemployment rate, there were growing fears of famine in the hinterlands, even as left- and right-wing militias continued to battle each other in the cities.

“They called it the first spring of freedom,” Michael Metrinko said acidly. “They continued to execute large numbers of people. The prisons were crammed…. Khomeini went big-time in for revenge. He had people arrested who had figured in his life going all the way back to when he was young, people he hadn’t liked. Other people were doing the same thing. It was a time for taking economic revenge, for getting more property, for making a grab for your neighbor’s house if you wanted to. If you had clout with revolutionary authorities, you could enrich yourself pretty quickly.”

A testament to what Metrinko had found on his fact-finding mission to Tabriz, a staggering number of middle-class Iranians were selling off their possessions at fire-sale prices with the intention of immigrating to whatever foreign country might take them. To that end, when the Tehran passport office reopened in a newly constructed building in April, so many applicants flooded in on opening day that security officers, fearful the floors would collapse, had to order its evacuation.

Significant in all this, however, was that very little blame seemed to attach to either Ayatollah Khomeini, now ensconced in his madrasa down in Qom, or the religious komitehs that continued to dictate so many aspects of daily life. Instead, popular anger tended to focus on the hapless Mehdi Bazargan and the increasingly impotent ministers he’d appointed, a focus the ayatollah and his minions were very happy to perpetuate. As one revolution chronicler wryly noted, “In a matter of a few weeks, Khomeini had achieved what the shah had always sought, to let others take the blame for unpopular decisions.”

Perhaps nothing more exemplified the growing puppet-master role Khomeini was assuming than the curious tale of Ayatollah Mahmoud Taleghani.

With a status rivaling that of Khomeini and Shariatmadari, the sixty-eight-year-old Taleghani had served as the chief spiritual guide of the leftist formations within the religious anti-shah movement, a leading proponent of what some called Islamic liberation theology. For his efforts, he had spent a decade in the shah’s prisons. While overshadowed by Khomeini during the revolution, by early spring 1979 Taleghani had grown alarmed by the authoritarian direction the nation was taking, in particular the unbridled power of the komitehs. His mistake, apparently, was in openly talking about it. In mid-April, the dissident cleric’s two grown sons and a daughter-in-law were briefly arrested by revolutionary authorities and held without charge. If meant as a threat, it was taken as such by Taleghani, who went into hiding, where he issued a warning that Iran could “once more fall back into the hands of dictatorship and despotism.”

While careful not to point a finger at any one individual, subsequent events suggest Taleghani had a particular person in mind. Two days later, he was summoned to a meeting with Khomeini in Qom, then brought out before the television cameras. “The leadership of Ayatollah Khomeini is not only accepted by me but the world has accepted it,” Taleghani averred with downcast eyes. “He is the source of belief, sincerity, determination and honesty. I have always approved of his struggles, his words and his projects.” For some who watched the interview, Taleghani’s performance was reminiscent of the Stalinist show trials of the 1930s, the rote professions of loyalty to the “Dear Leader” issuing from the lips of the condemned.

The grim tidings continued. After restarting the execution machine with Hoveyda, through the rest of April Sadegh Khalkhali sent a veritable who’s who of former generals and government ministers before his tribunal’s firing squads. The following month, “the hanging judge” announced the shah and twelve other former royal family members and associates had been sentenced to death in absentia and encouraged the faithful to kill any and all of them on sight. In early May, Khomeini approved the creation of a new paramilitary organization known as the Revolutionary Guards. Largely drawn from the same militias that served the mullah-led komitehs, the guards were given untrammeled authority to strike at “the enemies of God” wherever they might show themselves and in whatever guise; rather to be expected, this guise often took the form of anyone with the temerity to question the guards’ authority or who displayed Western leanings. Khomeini surely wasn’t going to restrain them. “We are still at war with the superpowers,” he had said in April. “The purging of the country is still ahead of us.”

But even now, the Carter administration hoped for the best, clung to the notion that while it continued to quietly work at the margins of things, it really could do little more than wait for the revolutionary passions to abate, for the practical and the moderate to prevail over the ideologues and hotheads. If this seemed overly passive, just what was the alternative?

The world soon got at least a partial answer to that question. In mid-May, and despite a concerted, behind-the-scenes effort by the administration to avert it, a group of senators led by the Republican Jacob Javits of New York overwhelmingly passed a resolution condemning the Iranian regime for its human rights abuses. Tehran’s response was swift and furious, with Khomeini and his minions raging against this latest calumny from “the great Satan.” Shortly before the Senate vote, Prime Minister Bazargan and Foreign Minister Yazdi had held very productive introductory meetings with the American diplomat slated to replace William Sullivan as ambassador; amid the furor over the Javits resolution, Bazargan was compelled to publicly reject the appointment. Instead, he announced, as punishment for this wanton intrusion into Iran’s domestic affairs, diplomatic relations with the United States would remain at the lowly, chargé d’affaires level for the foreseeable future.

And then something more visceral, more ominous. After a new series of denunciations of the United States by Khomeini and other militant clerics, on May 24 an estimated 80,000 demonstrators swirled past the embassy on Takht-e-Jamshid chanting “Death to America” and “Death to Carter.” By the following day, the number of protesters had swelled to 100,000, their chants even more bellicose, more impassioned. Looking on from inside the walls of the compound was the embassy’s tiny detachment of Marine guards—now reduced to precisely thirteen soldiers—augmented by an odd assortment of Iranian militiamen of dubious competence and loyalty. While these marches passed without incident, they served as yet another reminder, if one were needed, of just how volatile the atmosphere in Tehran remained, of how easily a small gesture—providing safe haven to an exiled leader, for example—might lead to calamity.

* * *

On an afternoon in the summer of 1979, Michael Metrinko stepped out of a car at the front gate of an Iranian army base and approached the group of scruffy Revolutionary Guards, Kalashnikovs casually slung over shoulders, standing at its entrance. Remaining by the car were the three American military officers for whom Metrinko was serving as interpreter.

Addressing the gunman who appeared to be in charge, Metrinko explained that he and the American officers had come to check on supplies a MAAG team had deposited there prior to their departure in February. Their visit had been approved at the highest levels of the Bazargan government, he added, and the base commander was expecting them. But the guard leader, clad in street clothes and in his early twenties, said no; of his own volition, he’d decided that no Americans would enter the base.

There followed a long standoff under a brutal summer sun, a series of messages and radio calls passing between the contemptuous Revolutionary Guards at the gate and regular army officers within the base. At long last, the guard leader announced he would allow Metrinko to pass, but that his American military companions were to wait outside.

As Metrinko started for the entrance, he saw a problem. “They’d strung a metal chain across the road,” he recalled, “and it was at the exact level where I’d either have to crawl under it or try to climb over and probably fall on my face.” With an expectant smile, the guard leader waited to see which mode of humiliation his visitor would choose. But Metrinko saw a third option. “I don’t know, maybe it was the heat or what had happened in Tabriz, but I just thought, ‘I’m not going to put up with this crap.’ ”

Unhooking the chain from the post at one end, Metrinko doubled it over in his hand and strode back to his tormentor. Before the guard had time to react, Metrinko whipped the chain across his face, knocking him to the ground.

The memory of the incident caused Metrinko to chuckle. “The guys with me went white as sheets; I’m sure they thought we were about to be machine-gunned. But you know what happened? The kid jumped to his feet: ‘I’m so sorry, sir. I disrespected you. Please forgive me. Please come to my home tonight for dinner. Please forgive me.’ ”

In looking back, Metrinko attributed his reaction partly to what he’d been told during his Peace Corps days at the Sonqor primary school, that Iranians respect only force. “Plus I’ve always had anger management issues. Anyway, it worked; that kid followed us around like a puppy for the rest of the day.”

Whatever that episode might have said about the Iranian psyche or Metrinko’s social skills, the notion of American soldiers poking around an Iranian army base underscored a startling change in U.S.-Iranian relations by the summer of 1979.

While still an open question where true power lay in Tehran, a growing contingent of its leaders were coming to accept the necessity of a continued close relationship with the United States. Paradoxically, much of this acceptance was being spurred by the same issue that, only months earlier, had served as a revolutionary touchstone: the extravagant U.S.-Iranian military alliance the shah had built. With the previous army command structure in tatters thanks to revolutionary execution squads, and with so much weaponry having been looted from its arsenals, the Iranian military was now running out of ammunition and critical spare parts as it battled insurgencies in Kurdistan and elsewhere. Very quietly, and even as mobs continued to regularly take to the streets to denounce the United States, senior Iranian political and military officials were working with their American counterparts to reestablish the arms pipeline. The chief Iranian liaison in this effort was, once again, the ubiquitous Ebrahim Yazdi.

On July 16, the newly arrived American chargé d’affaires, Bruce Laingen, held a lengthy meeting with Yazdi at the foreign minister’s request. The main thrust of their conversation centered on Yazdi’s efforts to speed up delivery of a range of American military spare parts that were stalled in the distribution pipeline. As Laingen reported to Washington in a secret memorandum, “The predominant impression that I carried away from the meeting was that our performance in this area could very well become the acid test in the official Iranian view of our sincerity in wanting a new beginning in our relationship with Iran.” Quite suddenly American officials saw the prior military alliance between the two nations less as a focal point of Iranian outrage than as an opportunity to reknit ties.

This development also looked to enhance the standing of those centrists in the Iranian political firmament, men like Bazargan and Yazdi, who urged a more pragmatic approach to governance. Accompanying this was what looked to be a general calming in Iranian society. With revolutionary fervor finally beginning to dissipate, attention was refocusing on the moribund economy. Through the late spring and summer, more and more previously shuttered businesses reopened, while by June oil production, the perpetual bellwether of Iran’s fiscal health, had rebounded to nearly two-thirds of normal output. Even the ministrations of Ayatollah Khalkhali’s execution squads had slackened, if only because “the hanging judge” was running out of prominent victims to kill, and this was helping spur a gradual improvement in Iran’s international standing. Naturally, this also meant fewer of those criticisms from the West that both the militant left and the militant right were so adroit at turning to their favor.

From Yazdi’s perspective, surely the most promising development was the release in mid-June of the proposed new constitution. Despite Khomeini’s earlier statements suggesting it was unnecessary, for months lawyers and constitutional experts selected by Bazargan had labored over the document, and they produced one that despite its length—it ran to 151 clauses—hewed closely in spirit to the 1906 constitution that Pahlavi father and son had so consistently abused. Gone was any talk of a monarchy, of course, but far more significantly, the document made no mention of the velayat concept of divinely sanctified governorship, anathema to moderates, that Khomeini had now taken to periodically floating. Most heartening of all, upon looking over the draft constitution at his home in Qom, the ayatollah announced his satisfaction and urged its adoption. Due to subsequent objections raised by several leftist groups, Khomeini ordered the formation of an Assembly of Experts to oversee edits to the document—elections for that panel would be held in early August—but for Islamic centrists like Yazdi, who hoped for a democratic Iran guided by Islamic principles, it appeared their fears of a “God’s will” dictatorship had been allayed.

The Carter administration also took note of these pleasing developments. After the spike in tensions following the Javits resolution in late May, Bruce Laingen, slated to be Ambassador Sullivan’s replacement, had embarked on an initial fence-mending mission to Tehran, one that included discussions with both Bazargan and Yazdi. On the basis of such meetings, he was able to report back to Washington that the situation in Iran was steadily improving, the climate for closer relations growing. What didn’t change was the embassy’s attitude toward the wandering shah: When queried anew in late July, Laingen again urged that he be kept out of the United States, but his reasons now had less to do with fear of a violent backlash in Iran’s streets than a retreat from the progress being made with its government.

On this, Laingen’s view was heartily endorsed by the State Department’s Henry Precht. From almost the very outset, the Iran country director had adamantly opposed admitting the shah into the United States and hadn’t been shy about voicing his feelings. In early spring, when it briefly appeared the administration was about to relent, he admonished his superiors about the mistake they were contemplating, then returned to his office to put a warning call through to William Sullivan, then still ambassador. “If they let him in,” Sullivan grimly said, “they will bring us out in boxes.” That threat had been averted obviously, and each subsequent time the matter came up, Henry Precht had manned the ramparts to keep the shah away.

At the same time, the country director was convinced that once Iran’s revolutionary fever died down, Khomeini would fade in importance and the moderates gain a firmer grip on power: Iran was simply too sophisticated a nation, its people too progressive and worldly, to stay in the thrall of a medievalist cabal for very long. The United States could help that process along both by signaling its acceptance of the new regime and by seeking engagement with its officials at whatever levels became available. One key way to pursue both these goals, Precht counseled, was for Washington to incrementally increase its diplomatic presence in Tehran—certainly not back to the numbers that had existed under the shah, but a gradual rise commensurate with the importance it attached to a rapprochement. Interestingly, while Precht was a classic “State Department liberal,” his advocacy on this score was seconded by military planners over at the Pentagon; by July, both DOD strategists in Washington and its advisors on the ground in Iran were urging that the administration accelerate resumption of the military parts pipeline to Tehran and strengthen ties with its military. In furtherance of this effort came Michael Metrinko’s memorable outing to the Iranian army base that summer, an event that would have been utterly unthinkable a few months earlier.

One official who didn’t share in this optimism was the National Security Council’s Gary Sick. “Simply based on the history of such things,” he explained, “it seemed to me the moderates were not going to win. People like Bazargan were intellectually impressive, but they were going up against all these komitehs in every neighborhood that were prepared to go out and crack heads and basically insist on their point of view. The Bazargans and Yazdis were much more willing to sit and talk through matters, but they didn’t have troops in the field to stand up to the crazies. I’m not saying I predicted what was going to happen, but I absolutely did not believe what Henry Precht and a bunch of people around him were saying that it was going to be this good group of Westernized moderates who would take over and the mullahs would fade to the background. I just never believed that a guy like Khomeini was going to fold up his tent and go home and let democracy flourish.” Sick gave a dry chuckle. “He just didn’t look the part.”

The cynics soon had evidence on their side. At the beginning of August, elections were held for the so-called Assembly of Experts that would oversee amending the new constitution, but in a colossally shortsighted move a range of left and centrist political groups boycotted the vote. This resulted in a panel thoroughly dominated by the clerical right, with fully fifty-five of its seventy-three members either mullahs or clerically approved archconservatives. As this assembly set to its task, almost instantly its work in progress bore scant resemblance to the mainstream document that had been put forward—and, ironically, approved by Khomeini—just two months earlier. Putting in an appearance through much of the new document was the velayat-e-faqih tenet that bestowed godly approval and powers on a temporal “supreme leader.”

While the electoral fight over the new constitution lay in the future—the Assembly of Experts wouldn’t release a final draft for ratification until October—Iran’s moderates soon had far more pressing concerns. On August 7, just four days after the assembly elections, religious authorities invoked new press laws to ban one of the nation’s leading newspapers as blasphemous. When protesters took to the streets of Tehran, an enraged Khomeini denounced them as “wild animals” and vowed to “burn them by the thousands.” The very same fate, he warned, awaited the rebellious Kurdish minority if they didn’t finally submit. Given such encouragement, on August 12 Revolutionary Guards set upon liberal demonstrators in downtown Tehran with truncheons and metal rods, injuring scores. Shortly after, and without even consulting his prime minister, Khomeini turned to the go-to writ of dictators everywhere, the declaration of a state of emergency. In revolutionary Iran, this meant the immediate shuttering of two dozen more newspapers and magazines that had dared dissent and the arrest of hundreds on charges of “serving Satan.” By the end of the month, Khomeini had also conducted a purge of the ministries and assumed the title of supreme commander of the armed forces. In early September, there came perhaps the most ominous note yet when Ayatollah Taleghani, the cleric who five months earlier had warned of growing despotism, abruptly dropped dead—from a heart attack according to authorities, from poisoning according to some of those close to him. Just days prior, Taleghani’s sons reported, their father had attended a clerical conference at which he had denounced the velayat precept and vowed to campaign against the new constitution when it came up for a vote.

But as the country veered toward theocracy, there appeared to be only muted reaction from the residents of the American embassy. In their defense, nearly all could count their tenure in Iran in terms of months, or even weeks, and few of them spoke Farsi. One habit they shared with their predecessors was a tendency to report back to Washington what Washington wanted to hear, and what Washington still wanted to hear in the late summer of 1979 was that the situation in Iran was improving. What’s more, so long as men like Mehdi Bazargan and Ebrahim Yazdi remained in the mix, the administration had little choice but to stay the course, to continue to hope that somehow the moderates would ultimately win out.

If Gary Sick was deeply skeptical of this outcome from his office at the White House, so was Michael Metrinko in Tehran. The political affairs officer had become increasingly convinced that the protracted tussle between centrists like Bazargan and the archconservatives around Khomeini was less a true power struggle than a kind of charade, with Bazargan serving as an acceptable figurehead to the outside world as the militant clerics and their komitehs and Revolutionary Guards steadily took over. “I don’t know if I ever used the term ‘useful idiot’ in describing Bazargan,” Metrinko said, “but that’s really what it came down to. Here was this nice, professorial-looking guy in his bow ties and cardigan sweaters—very pleasing to the Western eye—while the guys really running things were the mullahs.”

Never one to engage in bureaucratic logrolling, Metrinko said as much in his dispatches back to Washington. Curiously, this gave rise to one of the last chances the Carter administration had to forestall the political catastrophe about to descend.

Having not had a vacation in more than two years, in mid-September 1979, Metrinko took a month’s leave to return to the United States. After a brief stopover in Washington, he was preparing to go to his parents’ home in eastern Pennsylvania when a State Department official who had been reading his reports from the field implored Metrinko to stay another day. “He told me, ‘What you’re sending back is completely different from everything else we’re getting. It sounds really worrisome, and I want others in the [State] building to get your take.’ ”

With Metrinko agreeing to delay his departure, the official scrambled to arrange a meeting with senior State Department officials at the policymaking level. It was scheduled to take place in a State Department conference room the following afternoon.

Arriving at the conference room a few minutes early, Metrinko was going over his notes for his presentation when a departmental security officer approached to ask if they could speak in the hallway. There, the security officer explained that the meeting had been given a security classification higher than Metrinko had clearance to attend. Metrinko politely inquired if the officer understood that the reason for the meeting was to discuss his reporting.

“Yeah,” came the reply. “Doesn’t matter.”

With that, Metrinko left the room, and the conference didn’t happen. The administration was now six weeks from disaster.

* * *

Nearly a year after their first semi-clandestine conference in Washington, Henry Precht and Ebrahim Yazdi met again on the afternoon of October 3, 1979, in New York. The occasion was the annual General Assembly meeting of the United Nations, which Yazdi was attending as Iran’s foreign minister. Their reunion was very cordial, even warm—Yazdi was aware that within Washington’s foreign policy apparatus Precht was the foremost advocate of fully normalizing relations with Iran—and it was meant to pave the way for a far more momentous meeting the following day between Yazdi and Secretary of State Cyrus Vance. That encounter at the United Nations building marked the highest-level contact between Iranian and American government officials since the revolution eight months earlier.

But if he hoped that meeting would herald the start of a true rapprochement, Henry Precht was soon disappointed. From the very outset, Yazdi took an aggressive, even accusatory, stance with Vance and never let up. In the foreign minister’s telling, the United States still did not fully accept the legitimacy of the new regime in Tehran and continued to scheme against its economic and social recovery at every turn. Taken aback, Vance first tried to defend the administration’s actions, pointing out that it had publicly expressed its acceptance of the revolution on numerous occasions, before becoming testy in his own right. By the end of the hour-long session, both sides left feeling somewhat aggrieved.

But the attending Americans had picked up on an intriguing side note. Time and again, Yazdi had broken from his hectoring of Vance to make sure the Iranian scribes in the room were writing down or recording his every word. It strongly suggested that less than seeking to start a dialogue with his American counterpart, the Iranian foreign minister was playing to his listening audience back in Tehran, and this was an audience that both wanted and expected him to throw verbal haymakers. Consequently, as polite and accommodating as Yazdi could be in a private one-on-one meeting with Precht, when the cameras and scribes were present, he had to fulfill his role of strident revolutionary. What’s more, the audience he was playing to had increasingly narrowed down to one increasingly angry and xenophobic old man: Ruhollah Khomeini. In an interview with the Italian journalist Oriana Fallaci a few weeks earlier, the ayatollah had first blamed Iran’s current turmoil on the communists but then insisted it was actually “an artificial left” that was “created by the Americans to launch plundering against us, to sabotage and destroy us.” Keeping to this theme, a few days later Khomeini had exhorted religious pilgrims departing for Mecca to “endure oppression no longer, and vigilantly expose the criminal plans of the international bandits headed by America!” Under such circumstances, an Iranian diplomat might be understandably reluctant to be quoted or photographed getting all chummy with the great Satan’s secretary of state.

But if Ebrahim Yazdi was under a good deal of stress during those meetings in New York, so too were his American counterparts. That’s because, precisely one week earlier, they learned something that threatened to completely scramble their plans for the future of U.S.-Iranian relations. It came in the form of a telephone call from an aide to David Rockefeller to Undersecretary of State David Newsom on September 28: It seemed the health of the exiled shah had taken a sudden and precipitous decline, the aide related, so precipitous that his attending doctors felt he might have to receive treatment at a hospital in the United States.

In reality, the shah’s “sudden crisis” had been a long time in the making—and largely due to the absolute secrecy he’d insisted on maintaining about his health.

In May, during his stay in the Bahamas, the fallen king had grown increasingly gaunt and sallow while complaining of worsening pain in his upper abdomen. One of the French doctors who had been clandestinely administering to him for the previous five years was summoned from Paris. Fearing the shah’s lymphoma was accelerating, the Frenchman initiated a generalized chemotherapy regimen—generalized because his patient refused to be admitted to a hospital where tests might more specifically identify the malady. Instead, so emphatic was the shah on maintaining his secrecy that his first chemotherapy treatments were in a back room of his Paradise Island chalet, with his wife, the former empress of Iran, serving as nurse.

The shah soon showed signs of improvement, and even more so when he and his entourage escaped Paradise Island in mid-June for the far more welcoming environment of Cuernavaca, a resort city in the mountains just south of Mexico City. There the former King of Kings and his wife moved into an expansive residence in a leafy and well-protected cul-de-sac, while his sister, Shams, and other members of the extended royal family rented out adjacent homes; it was almost as if, in exile, the Pahlavis were re-creating a scaled-down version of their old family compound in the Tehran foothills.

But the idyll didn’t last; by late summer, the shah was deteriorating once again. By then, the exiled couple had come to rely on a young American public relations advisor, Robert Armao, whom David Rockefeller had hired to look after them. Although the thirty-year-old Armao had no medical background—prior to his attachment to the shah, his chief achievement was to serve as New York City’s official greeter, showing up at airports to welcome celebrities and sports teams to the city—he had little confidence in the French doctor who came and went from Paris. In late September, and with the shah increasingly jaundiced and in pain, he summoned Dr. Benjamin Kean, one of America’s leading tropical disease experts, to Cuernavaca. With Kean too prevented from administering the tests that might more accurately pinpoint the malady—the shah refused even to submit to a blood test—he came back with the vague diagnosis of “infectious hepatitis.” Vague and quite wrong, as it would ultimately turn out, but not before David Rockefeller’s office called Undersecretary Newsom with the dire news on September 28. More tests would be performed, Newsom was advised, and it was hoped the shah would respond to the new drugs Kean had prescribed, but if his condition didn’t improve, it might be necessary to bring the patient to the United States.

It was a call that sent shock waves throughout the Carter administration. “That was the very first time any of us knew the shah was sick,” Gary Sick said. “I know it seems unbelievable—and a lot of people still don’t believe it—but he’d somehow managed to keep that a secret from us for the past four or five years. But I have to say, at that moment, I think the first reaction of everyone in the administration was skepticism, deep skepticism. I know mine was.”

The reason for that skepticism was obvious. Throughout his stay in Mexico, the shah had continued his lobbying efforts to enter the United States and put pressure on his powerful American friends to do the same. Those friends had taken up the gauntlet, especially Henry Kissinger. The former secretary of state never missed an opportunity to give a speech or go before television cameras to decry what he saw as the administration’s shameful treatment of America’s former ally in refusing the shah entry, the image of weakness this conveyed to the world. Less publicly, Kissinger informed Brzezinski that his future support or opposition to the SALT II treaty with the Soviet Union, soon to be headed to the U.S. Senate for ratification, might well depend on more favorable treatment of the shah, a shocking bit of political blackmail considering what was at stake. So incessant was this campaign—in his autobiography, Carter noted that a week didn’t go by when he wasn’t badgered on the topic by someone—that the president occasionally lost his temper. “Fuck the shah!” he notably shouted when Brzezinski pressed him on the matter once too often. “I don’t give a damn what happens to the shah.”

In light of this ongoing full-court press, that the shah should now come down with a life-threatening malady possibly requiring hospitalization in America seemed a tad convenient.

But if the lobbying campaign had suddenly taken on a new flavor, it didn’t alter Carter’s two compelling reasons for wanting to keep the shah out: the enormous damage his admittance would inflict on efforts to repair U.S.-Iranian relations and the danger it might pose to the safety of the beleaguered American legation in Tehran.

While Vance and Henry Precht were aware of the shah’s health crisis when they met with Yazdi in early October, it appears no mention was made of it. Instead, the administration opted for the go-slow approach: to see if the shah responded well enough to his new treatment to avoid hospitalization and to determine if there was somewhere else he could go if not.

But then unwelcome news of a rather different sort. In mid-October, the Assembly of Experts, the Iranian panel elected to fashion a new national constitution, released its tentative draft. For Iran’s progressives and centrists, it was a devastating document. Instead of a democratic republic guided by Islamic principles, it portended a theocratic dictatorship with the powers and decisions of its “supreme leader” guided and sanctified by God himself. While the constitution was scheduled to be decided by a national referendum in early December, the Assembly of Experts also preemptively bestowed on Ayatollah Khomeini the title of supreme religious leader, and should any wonder if that leadership extended into the political realm, Khomeini had already supplied the answer. “Those intellectuals who say that the clergy should leave politics and go back to the mosque,” he had thundered from his Qom pulpit, “speak on behalf of Satan.”

This time, the opposition refused to be buffaloed. Across Iran’s political spectrum—at least the nation’s permitted political spectrum—the proposed constitution provoked a tidal wave of denunciations. Even the ever-timorous Shariatmadari, now the spokesman of a moderate religious political party, voiced his strong disapproval and urged his supporters to vote no on December 3. With Iran once again plunging into political warfare, the last thing an embattled centrist like Ebrahim Yazdi needed was more trouble, but trouble was exactly what he got. The herald delivering it was Henry Precht.

On October 19, Precht was preparing to leave on a fact-finding mission to Tehran, a week- to ten-day outing that would allow him to sound out both Iranian officials and the resident American diplomats on the current state of affairs, when he was summoned to Undersecretary Newsom’s office. “We are about to admit the shah to the United States,” Newsom’s chief aide told Precht. “A decision is about to be made in the White House.”

To the bafflement of Benjamin Kean, the American doctor who diagnosed the shah as suffering from hepatitis, his patient had shown no improvement through the first half of October; in fact, he’d grown much worse. It was only then that the French medical team let Kean in on their secret: They’d been treating the shah for malignant lymphoma for the past five years and secretly administering chemotherapy since May but to little effect. Rushing to Mexico, Kean reexamined the shah on the morning of October 18 and concluded his death was imminent unless he was quickly moved to a world-class hospital for treatment and surgery. That level of care was unavailable in Mexico, Kean contended, and there simply wasn’t time to find a suitable alternative in Western Europe or Asia; the shah must be brought to the United States. The State Department’s own medical director, looking over the shah’s medical records, swiftly came to the same assessment. The following morning, and just as Henry Precht was preparing to leave for Tehran, Carter gathered his senior foreign policy advisors and asked each one their opinion of what he should do. When all agreed that the shah must be allowed into the country, the grim-faced president posed a question: “What are you guys going to advise me to do if they overrun our embassy and take our people hostage?”

According to one of those present, Vice President Mondale, there followed a long silence, finally broken by Carter muttering, “I thought so.”

But it was over; after resisting all entreaties for eight months, the president now accepted that he had no choice but to allow the shah into the United States.

In light of the firestorm this was likely to trigger, State Department colleagues of Precht’s advised him to cancel his trip to Iran. “I said, ‘What shall I do, send a message to Tehran saying “Shah is coming here—too dangerous for me to come out there. Good luck”?’ I couldn’t do that.”

Instead, and in recognition of the fact that he was probably the American official most trusted by the Iranian government, Precht got on the plane to Tehran.

He was met there the following afternoon by the chargé d’affaires, Bruce Laingen. “I’m afraid I’ve got some bad news,” Precht started, but Laingen waved him off. “I know.” In anticipation of the task before them, Laingen had already arranged a meeting with Yazdi for first thing the following morning.

At that meeting, the American envoys came quickly to the point, describing the shah’s steep medical decline over the previous month that now left the administration with no choice but to accede to his doctors’ request that he be brought to the United States for treatment. Much like Gary Sick at the National Security Council, Yazdi was both stunned and deeply skeptical of the news, the astoundingly convenient timing of it for an exile in desperate search of safe haven. With his own medical background, Yazdi pressed for details until he was begrudgingly satisfied the crisis was genuine. Not that it much changed matters. As Laingen later recalled, “I’ll never forget Yazdi’s last words. He said, ‘You are opening Pandora’s box.’ ”

Yazdi would remember adding something else. “I said, ‘You might convince me this is necessary, but you will never convince the Iranian people. They will never believe this.’ ”

On the afternoon of October 23, Precht and Laingen gathered the senior staff of the American embassy to inform them that at that very moment the shah was on his way to New York. One of those present remembered that the room went totally silent. “In time it was broken by a faint groan. Faces literally went white. I put my hands over my own face and had a good think—not about policy or professional duties but about how much I wanted to go home.”

* * *

In the predawn hours of October 23, a Gulfstream airplane out of Miami landed at New York’s LaGuardia Airport. Within minutes, a small motorcade with police outriders had raced the ailing King of Kings the short distance across the East River to New York Hospital. Under heavy security, the shah and his entourage were taken to a suite of rooms on the hospital’s seventeenth floor, where he was prepped for surgery. The next afternoon, doctors removed his spleen, swollen to three times its normal size, as well as a number of gallstones from his gallbladder. They also diagnosed him as suffering from a particularly virulent strain of lymph node cancer called histiocytic lymphoma. Once stabilized from his surgery, the shah would begin a battery of intensive chemotherapy at the adjacent Cornell Medical Center.

Despite the low-profile nature of his arrival, news of the shah’s presence in New York was quickly broadcast throughout the world, so by that same afternoon of October 23 several hundred demonstrators gathered in the street outside the hospital to protest. For the next two weeks, as the fallen king convalesced from his surgery and underwent chemotherapy, the protesters’ megaphone-enhanced chants of “Death to the shah!” served as a frequent audible backdrop in his hospital room. During that time, he received a steady stream of well-wishers, most of them prominent Iranians now living in exile, but also including a number of former American government officials and, somewhat incongruously, the comedian Red Skelton. No officials from the Carter administration visited.

In popular memory, it was the shah’s arrival in the United States that precipitated the world-changing crisis about to occur, but this is not altogether accurate. In actual fact, that crisis was set into motion by a convergence of events that, while including the shah’s presence in New York, extended to a series of unrelated incidents within Iran, as well as the taking of a photograph in an Algerian hotel room.

By late October, Ayatollah Khomeini’s attention seemed far more drawn to the political tensions unleashed by the approaching constitutional vote than on the current whereabouts of the ailing shahanshah. In a speech delivered three days after the shah’s arrival in New York, he made only passing reference to the event, allowing that maybe now they should bring a lawsuit against him in American courts to recover the money he had stolen. The ayatollah returned more to form on November 1 in delivering an inaugural address for a new national “Student Day” observance. While still not dwelling on the shah’s arrival in “Satan’s Lair” a week earlier, his extemporaneous speech degenerated into an only intermittently coherent rant against the West. The part that was coherent called for the nation’s youth to broaden their attacks on the forces of imperialism, and especially on the schemes of the ever-conniving United States.

Testament to the deepening anti-American fervor Khomeini was helping fuel, for the previous several weeks a group of radical university students had been hatching a plan to strike a dramatic blow against the local manifestation of Yankee imperialism: the American embassy on Takht-e-Jamshid Avenue. The plan called for plotters to join one of the anti-American street demonstrations that periodically paraded past the embassy, but to then abruptly break away, climb the walls surrounding the compound and seize control of the installations within. While temporarily holding the American officials there hostage, the students would then methodically pore through the embassy’s top-secret files until they found the documents that outlined the Americans’ plans to subvert Iran, and publicize them to the outside world. Once this was achieved—a matter of a few days at most, the plotters estimated—they would release their captives and surrender to authorities, their good deed for the revolution and anti-imperialism done. The great question mark hanging over this fever dream, however, was how Ayatollah Khomeini might respond, whether he would applaud or denounce their action. With Khomeini’s address of November 1 exhorting the nation’s youth to widen their war against America, the conspirators believed their question had been unequivocally answered.

And something else happened on November 1. To celebrate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the revolution that led to Algeria’s independence from France, Algerian leaders had welcomed senior government officials from around the world to their capital of Algiers. Attending for Iran were both Prime Minister Bazargan and Foreign Minister Yazdi. Heading up the American delegation was National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski. On November 1, Brzezinski accepted an invitation from Bazargan to call on him in his hotel suite for informal talks. On hand for that meeting was Yazdi, as well as at least one Iranian press photographer.

For those Iranian militants seeking to finally put an end to their government of moderates, the photographs of Bazargan and Yazdi smiling and shaking hands with the American official who had been the shah’s greatest defender, who had until the very end urged Iran’s generals to crush the revolution by force, were like a gift from a most provident god. On November 3, those images appeared on national television and were splayed across the front page of almost every militant-controlled newspaper in Iran, for, if ever there was cause to unmask and move against those who would betray the revolution, this was surely it.

And there was one more thing: Despite being posted to an anniversary-obsessed society, American embassy officials had been repeatedly caught unaware of those historical or religious milestones that both punctuated and inflamed the revolution. This pattern was to repeat on the following day, November 4, 1979, the fifteenth anniversary of the day Ruhollah Khomeini was ignominiously hustled aboard an airplane and cast into exile. On that morning, the university students who had been planning to attack the American embassy fell in with another street protest against Yankee imperialism on Takht-e-Jamshid. Without warning, at about 11:15 the first of what would prove to be some 125 conspirators broke away from the main body of marchers and started hoisting themselves over the low brick wall and wrought-iron fence at the embassy’s front gate. So began the strangest and most protracted diplomatic crisis in history, one that was to forever change the course of world events.
